--- Page 10 ---
Health Precautions and Guidelines 
During First Aid Training
The American Red Cross has trained millions of people in ﬁ  rst aid and 
 cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) using manikins as training aids. 
The Red Cross follows widely accepted guidelines for cleaning and decontaminating training manikins. 
If these guidelines are adhered to, the risk of any kind of disease transmission during 
training is extremely low.
To help minimize the risk of disease transmission, you should follow some basic health precautions and 
guidelines while participating in training. You should take precautions if you have a condition that would 
increase your risk or other participants’ risk of exposure to infections. Request a separate training manikin 
if you—
 ■Have an acute condition, such as a cold, a sore throat, or cuts or sores on the hands or around your mouth.
 ■Know you are seropositive (have had a positive blood test) for hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg), 
indicating that you are currently infected with the hepatitis B virus.*
 ■Know you have a chronic infection indicated by long-term seropositivity (long-term positive blood tests) 
for the hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg)* or a positive blood test for anti-HIV (that is, a positive test for 
antibodies to HIV, the virus that causes many severe infections including AIDS).
 ■Have had a positive blood test for hepatitis C (HCV).
 ■Have a type of condition that makes you unusually likely to get an infection.
To obtain information about testing for individual health status, visit the CDC Web site at: 
 www.cdc.gov/ncidod/diseases/hepatitis/c/faq.htm
After a person has had an acute hepatitis B infection, he or she will no longer test positive for the surface 
antigen but will test positive for the hepatitis B antibody (anti-HBs). Persons who have been vaccinated 
for hepatitis B will also test positive for the hepatitis antibody. A positive test for the hepatitis B antibody 
(antiHBs) should not be confused with a positive test for the hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAG).
If you decide you should have your own manikin, ask your instructor if he or she can provide 
one for you to use. You will not be asked to explain why in your request. The manikin will not be used 
by anyone else until it has been cleaned according to the recommended end-of-class decon tamination 
procedures. Because the number of manikins available for class use is limited, the more advance notice 
you give, the more likely it is that you can be provided a separate manikin.
*A person with hepatitis B infection will test positive for the hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg). Most persons infected with hepatitis B 
will get better within a period of time. However, some hepatitis B infections will become chronic and will linger for much longer. These 
persons will continue to test positive for HBsAg. Their decision to participate in CPR training should be guided by their physician.
viii  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
 

--- Page 11 ---
Some people are sensitive to certain allergens and may have an allergic reaction.  If you start experiencing 
skin redness, rash, hives, itching, runny nose, sneezing, itchy eyes, scratchy throat or signs of asthma, wash 
your hands immediately.  If conditions persist or you experience a severe reaction, stop training and seek 
medical attention right away.
GUIDELINES
In addition to taking the precautions regarding manikins, you can further protect yourself and other 
participants from infection by following these guidelines:
 ■Wash your hands thoroughly before participating in class activities.
 ■Do not eat, drink, use tobacco products or chew gum during class when manikins are used.
 ■Clean the manikin properly before use. 
 ■For some manikins, this means vigorously wiping the manikin’s face and the inside of its mouth with a 
clean gauze pad soaked with either a fresh solution of liquid chlorine bleach and water 
(1⁄4 cup sodium 
hypochlorite per gallon of tap water) or rubbing alcohol. The surfaces should remain wet for at least 
1 minute before they are wiped dry with a second piece of clean, absorbent material. 
 ■For other manikins, it means changing the manikin’s face. Your instructor will provide you with 
instructions for cleaning the type of manikin used in your class.
 ■Follow the guidelines provided by your instructor when practicing skills such as clearing a blocked airway 
with your ﬁ nger.
PHYSICAL STRESS AND INJURY
Successful course completion requires full participation in classroom and skill sessions, as well as successful 
performance in skill and knowledge evaluations. Due to the nature of the skills in this course, you will be 
participating in strenuous activities, such as performing CPR on the ﬂ oor. If you have a medical condition or 
disability that will prevent you from taking part in the skills practice sessions, please let your instructor know 
so that accommodations can be made. If you are unable to participate fully in the course, participate as much 
as you can or desire. Be aware that you will not be eligible to receive a course completion certiﬁ cate unless 
you participate fully and meet all course objectives and prerequisites.
  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Health Precautions and Guidelines During First Aid Training     ix
 

--- Page 12 ---


--- Page 13 ---
  CHAPTER  1    |    Before Giving Care and Checking an Injured or Ill Person     1
Before Giving Care and Checking 
an Injured or Ill Person
CHAPTER     1
M
edical emergencies can happen every day, in any setting. People are injured in situations like falls or 
motor-vehicle accidents, or they develop sudden illnesses, such as heart attack or stroke.
The statistics are sobering. For example, about 900,000 people in the United States die each year from some 
form of heart disease. More than 300,000 of these deaths are caused by sudden cardiac arrest. Heart disease is the 
number one cause of death in this country.
Another leading cause of death is unintentional injury. In 2008, approximately 118,000 Americans died from an 
unintentional injury and another 25.7 million were disabled.
Given the large number of injuries and sudden illnesses that occur in the United States each year, it is possible that you 
might have to deal with an emergency situation someday. If you do, you should know who and when to call, what care 
to give and how to give that care until emergency medical help takes over. 
This chapter discusses your role in the emergency medical services (EMS) system, the purpose of Good Samaritan laws, 
how to gain consent from an injured or ill person and how to reduce your risk of disease transmission while giving care. 
In addition, you will read about the emergency action steps, CHECK—CALL—CARE, which guide you on how to 
check and give emergency care for an injured or suddenly ill person. You also will read about the effects of incident 
stress and how to identify the signals of shock and minimize its effects. 
 

--- Page 14 ---
2   First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
YOUR ROLE IN THE EMS 
 SYSTEM
You play a major role in making the EMS system 
work effectively. The EMS system is a network of 
community resources, including police, ﬁ re and medical 
personnel—and you.
The system begins when someone like you recognizes 
that an emergency exists and decides to take action, 
such as calling 9-1-1 or the local emergency number for 
help. The EMS dispatcher or call taker answers the call 
and uses the information that you give to determine 
what help is needed (Fig. 1-1). Emergency personnel are 
dispatched to the scene based on the information given. 
These personnel then give care at the scene and transport 
the injured or ill person to the hospital where emergency 
department staff and other professionals take over.
Early arrival of emergency personnel increases 
a person’s chance of surviving a life-threatening 
emergency. Calling 9-1-1 or the local emergency number 
is the most important action that you can take.
Your role in the EMS system includes four basic steps:
Step 1: Recognize that an emergency exists.
Step 2: Decide to act.
Step 3: Activate the EMS system.
Step 4: Give care until help takes over.
Step 1: Recognize that an Emergency 
Exists
Emergencies can happen to anyone, anywhere. 
Before you can give help, however, you must be able 
to recognize an emergency. You may realize that an 
emergency has occurred only if you become aware 
of unusual noises, sights, odors and appearances or 
behaviors. Examples include the following:
Unusual noises
 ■
Screaming, moaning, yelling or calls for help  /ring1
Breaking glass, crashing metal or screeching  /ring1
tires 
A change in the sound made by machinery  /ring1
or equipment
Sudden, loud noises, such as the sound of 
 /ring1
collapsing buildings or falling ladders
Unusual silence
 /ring1
Unusual sights ■
A stopped vehicle on the roadside or a car that has  /ring1
run off of the road
Downed electrical wires 
 /ring1
A person lying motionless /ring1
Spilled medication or empty container  /ring1
An overturned pot in the kitchen /ring1
Sparks, smoke or ﬁ  re (Fig. 1-2, A) /ring1
Unusual odors ■
Odors that are stronger than usual /ring1
Unrecognizable odors  /ring1
Inappropriate odors /ring1
Unusual appearances or behaviors  ■
Unconsciousness (Fig. 1-2, B) /ring1
Confusion, drowsiness or unusual  behavior  /ring1
(Fig. 1-2, C)
Trouble breathing
 /ring1
Sudden collapse, slip or fall /ring1
FIGURE 1-1 EMS call taker or dispatcher
FIGURE 1-2, A–C Unusual sights or behavior may indicate an emergency.
ABC
 

--- Page 15 ---
  CHAPTER  1    |    Before Giving Care and Checking an Injured or Ill Person     3
Clutching the chest or throat /ring1
A person doubled over in pain /ring1
Slurred, confused or hesitant speech /ring1
Sweating for no apparent reason /ring1
Uncharacteristic skin color /ring1
Inability to move a body part  /ring1
Step 2: Decide to Act
Once you recognize that an emergency has occurred, you 
must decide how to help and what to do. There are many 
ways you can help in an emergency, but in order to help, 
you must act.
Overcoming Barriers to Act
Being faced with an emergency may bring out mixed 
feelings. While wanting to help, you also may feel 
hesitant or may want to back away from the situation. 
These feelings are personal and real.
Sometimes, even though people recognize that 
an emergency has occurred, they fail to act. The 
most common factors that keep people from 
responding are:
Panic or fear of doing something wrong
 ■
Being unsure of the person’s condition and what to do ■
Assuming someone else will take action ■
Type of injury or illness ■
Fear of catching a disease (see the Disease  ■
Transmission and Prevention section in this 
chapter)
Fear of being sued (see discussion of Good Samaritan 
 ■
laws in this chapter)
Being unsure of when to call 9-1-1 or the local 
 ■
emergency number
Panic or Fear of Doing Something Wrong 
People react differently in emergencies. Some people 
are afraid of doing the wrong thing and making matters 
worse. Sometimes people simply panic. Knowing what 
to do in an emergency can instill conﬁ  dence that can 
help you to avoid panic and be able to provide the right 
care. If you are not sure what to do, call 9-1-1 or the 
local emergency number and follow the instructions of 
the EMS dispatcher or call taker. The worst thing to do 
is nothing.
Being Unsure of the Person’s Condition 
and What to Do
Because most emergencies happen in or near the home, 
you are more likely to ﬁ nd yourself giving care to a 
family member or a friend than to someone you do not 
know. However, you may be faced with an emergency 
situation involving a stranger, and you might feel 
uneasy about helping someone whom you do not know. 
For example, the person may be much older or much 
younger than you, be of a different gender or race, have 
a disabling condition, be of a different status at work or 
be the victim of a crime. 
Sometimes, people who have been injured or become 
suddenly ill may act strangely or be uncooperative. 
The injury or illness; stress; or other factors, such as 
the effects of drugs, alcohol or medications, may make 
people unpleasant or angry. Do not take this behavior 
personally. If you feel at all threatened by the person’s 
behavior, leave the immediate area and call 9-1-1 or the 
local emergency number for help.
Assuming Someone Else Will Take Action
If several people are standing around, it might not 
be easy to tell if anyone is giving care. Always ask if 
you can help. Just because there is a crowd does not 
mean someone is caring for the injured or ill person. 
In fact, you may be the only one on the scene who 
knows ﬁ rst aid.
Although you may feel embarrassed about coming 
forward in front of other people, this should not stop 
you from offering help. Someone has to take action in an 
emergency, and it may have to be you.
If others already are giving care, ask if you can help. 
If bystanders do not appear to be helping, tell them 
how to help. You can ask them to call 9-1-1 or the local 
emergency number, meet the ambulance and direct it 
to your location, keep the area free of onlookers and 
trafﬁ c, send them for blankets or other supplies such 
as a ﬁ  rst aid kit or an automated external deﬁ brillator 
(AED), or help to give care. 
The Type of Injury or Illness 
An injury or illness sometimes may be very unpleasant. 
Blood, vomit, bad odors, deformed body parts, or torn 
or burned skin can be very upsetting. You may have to 
turn away for a moment and take a few deep breaths to 
get control of your feelings before you can give care. If 
you still are unable to give care, you can help in other 
ways, such as volunteering to call 9-1-1 or the local 
emergency number.
Fear of Catching a Disease 
Many people worry about the possibility of being 
infected with a disease while giving care. Although it 
is possible for diseases to be transmitted in a ﬁ rst aid 
situation, it is extremely unlikely that you will catch 
a disease this way. (For more information on disease 
transmission, see the Disease Transmission section 
in this chapter.)
 

--- Page 16 ---
4  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
Fear of Being Sued
Sometimes people worry that they might be sued for 
giving care. In fact, lawsuits against people who give 
emergency care at a scene of an accident are highly 
unusual and rarely successful. 
Good Samaritan Laws
The vast majority of states and the District of 
Columbia have Good Samaritan laws that protect 
people against claims of negligence when they give 
emergency care in good faith without accepting 
anything in return. Good Samaritan laws usually 
protect citizens who act the same way that a 
“reasonable and prudent person” would if that 
person were in the same situation. For example, 
a reasonable and prudent person would:
Move a person only if the person’s life were in danger.
 ■
Ask a conscious person for permission, also called  ■
consent, before giving care.
Check the person for life-threatening conditions  ■
before giving further care.
Call 9-1-1 or the local emergency number.
 ■
Continue to give care until more highly trained  ■
personnel take over.
Good Samaritan laws were developed to encourage 
people to help others in emergency situations. They 
require the “Good Samaritan” to use common sense 
and a reasonable level of skill and to give only the type 
of emergency care for which he or she is trained. They 
assume each person would do his or her best to save a 
life or prevent further injury.
Non-professionals who respond to emergencies, also 
called “lay responders,” rarely are sued for helping in an 
emergency. Good Samaritan laws protect the responder 
from ﬁ nancial responsibility. In cases in which a 
lay responder’s actions were deliberately negligent 
or reckless or when the responder abandoned the 
person after starting care, the courts have ruled Good 
Samaritan laws do not protect the responder.
For more information about your state’s Good 
Samaritan laws, contact a legal professional or check 
with your local library.
Being Unsure When to Call 9-1-1 
People sometimes are afraid to call 9-1-1 or the local 
emergency number because they are not sure that the 
situation is a real emergency and do not want to waste 
the time of the EMS personnel.
Your decision to act in an emergency should be 
guided by your own values and by your knowledge of 
the risks that may be present. However, even if you 
decide not to give care, you should at least call 9-1-1 
or the local emergency number to get emergency 
medical help to the scene.
Step 3: Activate the EMS System
Activating the EMS system by calling 9-1-1 or the local 
emergency number is the most important step you can 
take in an emergency. Remember, some facilities, 
such as hotels, ofﬁ ce and university buildings, and some 
stores, require you to dial a 9 or some other number 
to get an outside line before you dial 9-1-1. 
Also, a few areas still are without access to a 9-1-1 system 
and use a local emergency number instead. Becoming 
familiar with your local system is important because 
the rapid arrival of emergency medical help greatly 
increases a person’s chance of surviving a 
life-threatening emergency.
When your call is answered, an emergency call taker 
(or dispatcher) will ask for your phone number, address, 
location of the emergency and questions to determine 
whether you need police, ﬁ  re or medical assistance.
You should not hang up before the call taker does so. 
Once EMS personnel are on the way, the call taker may 
stay on the line and continue to talk with you. Many call 
takers also are trained to give ﬁ rst aid instructions so 
they can assist you with life-saving techniques until EMS 
personnel take over.
Step 4: Give Care Until Help Takes Over
This manual and the American Red Cross First Aid/
CPR/AED courses provide you with the conﬁ dence, 
knowledge and skills you need to give care to a person in 
an emergency medical situation.
In general, you should give the appropriate care to an ill 
or injured person until:
You see an obvious sign of life, such as breathing.
 ■
Another trained responder or EMS personnel  ■
take over.
You are too exhausted to continue. ■
The scene becomes unsafe. ■
If you are prepared for unforeseen emergencies, you can 
help to ensure that care begins as soon as possible for 
yourself, your family and your fellow citizens. If 
you are trained in ﬁ rst aid, you can give help that can 
save a life in the ﬁ rst few minutes of an emergency. 
First aid can be the difference between life and death. 
Often, it makes the difference between complete 
recovery and permanent disability. By knowing what 
to do and acting on that knowledge, you can make 
a difference. 
 

--- Page 17 ---
  CHAPTER  1    |    Before Giving Care and Checking an Injured or Ill Person 5
Getting Permission to Give Care
People have a basic right to decide what can and cannot 
be done to their bodies. They have the legal right to 
accept or refuse emergency care. Therefore, before 
giving care to an injured or ill person, you must obtain 
the person’s permission. 
To get permission from a conscious person, you must 
ﬁ rst tell the person who you are, how much training you 
have (such as training in ﬁ rst aid, CPR and/or AED), 
what you think is wrong and what you plan to do. You 
also must ask if you may give care. When a conscious 
person who understands your questions and what you 
plan to do gives you permission to give care, this is 
called expressed consent. Do not touch or give care to 
a conscious person who refuses it. If the person refuses 
care or withdraws consent at any time, step back and 
call for more advanced medical personnel.
Sometimes, adults may not be able to give expressed 
consent. This includes people who are unconscious 
or unable to respond, confused, mentally impaired, 
seriously injured or seriously ill. In these cases, 
the law assumes that if the person could respond, 
he or she would agree to care. This is called 
implied consent. 
If the conscious person is a child or an infant, 
permission to give care must be obtained from a parent 
or guardian when one is available. If the condition 
is life threatening, permission—or consent—is implied 
if a parent or guardian is not present. If the parent 
or guardian is present but does not give consent, 
do not give care. Instead, call 9-1-1 or the local 
emergency number.
DISEASE TRANSMISSION 
AND PREVENTION
Infectious diseases—those that can spread from one 
person to another—develop when germs invade the body 
and cause illness. 
How Disease Spreads
The most common germs are bacteria and viruses. 
Bacteria can live outside of the body and do not 
depend on other organisms for life. The number 
of ba cteria that infect humans is small, but some 
cause serious infections. These can be treated with 
medications called antibiotics.
Viruses depend on other organisms to live. Once in 
the body, it is hard to stop their progression. Few 
medications can ﬁ ght viruses. The body’s immune 
system is its number one protection against infection.
Bacteria and viruses spread from one person to another 
through direct or indirect contact. Direct contact 
occurs when germs from the person’s blood or other 
body ﬂ uids pass directly into your body through breaks 
or cuts in your skin or through the lining of your mouth, 
nose or eyes. 
Some diseases, such as the common cold, are transmitted 
by droplets in the air we breathe. They can be passed on 
through indirect contact with shared objects like spoons, 
doorknobs and pencils that have been exposed to the 
droplets. Fortunately, exposure to these germs usually is 
not adequate for diseases to be transmitted.
Animals, including humans and insects, also can spread 
some diseases through bites. Contracting a disease from 
a bite is rare in any situation and uncommon when 
giving ﬁ rst aid care. 
Some diseases are spread more easily than others. Some 
of these, like the ﬂ u, can create discomfort but often are 
temporary and usually not serious for healthy adults.
Other germs can be more serious, such as the Hepatitis 
B virus (HBV), Hepatitis C virus (HCV) and Human 
Immunodeﬁ ciency Virus (HIV), which causes Acquired 
Immune Deﬁ ciency Syndrome (AIDS) 
(see HIV and AIDS box in this chapter). Although 
serious, they are not easily transmitted and are not 
spread by casual contact, such as shaking hands. 
The primary way to transmit HBV, HCV or HIV during 
ﬁ rst aid care is through blood-to-blood contact. 
Preventing Disease Transmission
By following some basic guidelines, you can greatly 
decrease your risk of getting or transmitting an 
infectious disease while giving care or cleaning up 
a blood spill.
While Giving Care
To prevent disease transmission when giving care, 
follow what are known as standard precautions: 
Avoid contact with blood and other body ﬂ uids 
 ■
or objects that may be soiled with blood and other 
body ﬂ uids.
Use protective CPR breathing barriers. 
 ■
Use barriers, such as disposable gloves, between the  ■
person’s blood or body ﬂ  uids and yourself.
Before putting on personal protective equipment  ■
(PPE), such as disposable gloves, cover any of your 
own cuts, scrapes or sores with a bandage.
Do not eat, drink or touch your mouth, nose or eyes  ■
when giving care or before you wash your hands after 
care has been given.
 

--- Page 18 ---
6  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
FOCUS ON PREPAREDNESS
Important Information
Keep medical information about you and  ■
your family in a handy place, such as on 
the refrigerator door or in your car’s glove 
compartment. Keep medical and insurance 
records up to date. 
Wear a medical ID tag, bracelet or necklace 
 ■
if you have a potentially serious medical 
condition, such as epilepsy, diabetes, heart 
disease or allergies.
Make sure your house or apartment number is 
 ■
easy to read. Numerals are easier to read than 
spelled-out numbers.
Emergency Telephone Numbers 
Keep all emergency telephone numbers in a  ■
handy place, such as by the telephone or in the 
ﬁ rst aid kit. Include home and work numbers of 
family members and friends. Be sure to keep 
both lists current.
If your wireless phone came pre-programmed 
 ■
with the auto-dial 9-1-1 feature turned on, turn 
off the feature.
Do not program your phone to automatically  ■
dial 9-1-1 when one button, such as the “9” 
key is pressed. Unintentional 9-1-1 calls, 
which often occur with auto-dial keys, cause 
problems for emergency call centers.
Lock your keypad when you’re not using your 
 ■
wireless phone. This action prevents automatic 
calls to 9-1-1.
Most communities are served by an emergency  ■
9-1-1 telephone number. If your community 
does not operate on a 9-1-1 system, look up 
the numbers for the police, ﬁ re department and 
EMS personnel. Emergency numbers usually 
are listed in the front of the telephone book. 
Know the number for the National Poison 
Control Center Hotline, 1-800-222-1222, 
and post it on or near your telephones. Teach 
everyone in your home how and when to use 
these numbers. 
Many 9-1-1 calls in the United States are not 
 ■
emergencies. For this reason, some cities have 
started using 3-1-1 (or similar) as a number for 
people to call for non-emergency situations. Find 
out if your area uses this number. Remember, 
your local emergency number is for just that—
emergencies! So, please use good judgment.
First Aid Kit
Keep a ﬁ  rst aid kit in your home, car, workplace  ■
and recreation area. A well-stocked ﬁ  rst aid kit 
is a handy thing to have. Carry a ﬁ  rst aid kit with 
you or know where you can ﬁ  nd one. Find out 
the location of ﬁ  rst aid kits where you work or 
for any place where you spend a lot of time. 
First aid kits come in many shapes and sizes. 
You can purchase one from redcross.org 
or the local American Red Cross chapter. 
Your local drug store may sell them. You also 
may make your own. Some kits are designed 
for speciﬁ  c activities, such as hiking, camping 
or boating. Whether you buy a ﬁ  rst aid kit or put 
one together, make sure it has all of the items 
you may need. Include any personal items such 
as medications and emergency phone numbers 
or other items suggested by your health care 
provider. Check the kit regularly. Make sure that 
ﬂ ashlight batteries work. Check expiration dates 
and replace any used or out-of-date contents.
The Red Cross recommends that all ﬁ rst aid 
 ■
kits for a family of four include the following:
2 absorbent compress dressings  /ring1
(5 x 9 inches)
25 adhesive bandages (assorted sizes)
 /ring1
BE PREPARED FOR AN INJURY OR ILLNESS!
(Continued )
 

--- Page 19 ---
  CHAPTER  1    |    Before Giving Care and Checking an Injured or Ill Person 7
Avoid handling any of your personal items, such as  ■
pens or combs, while giving care or before you wash 
your hands.
Do not touch objects that may be soiled with blood or  ■
other body ﬂ uids.
Be prepared by having a ﬁ rst aid kit handy and  ■
stocked with PPE, such as disposable gloves, 
CPR breathing barriers, eye protection and other 
supplies. 
Wash your hands thoroughly with soap and warm 
 ■
running water when you have ﬁ nished giving care, 
even if you wore disposable gloves. Alcohol-based 
hand sanitizers allow you to clean your hands when 
soap and water are not readily available and your 
hands are not visibly soiled. (Keep alcohol-based hand 
sanitizers out of reach of children.)
Tell EMS personnel at the scene or your health care 
 ■
provider if you have come into contact with an injured 
or ill person’s body ﬂ uids. 
If an exposure occurs in a workplace setting,  ■
follow your company’s exposure control plan for 
reporting incidents and follow-up (post-exposure) 
evaluation.
While Cleaning Up Blood Spills
To prevent disease transmission while cleaning up a 
blood spill:
Clean up the spill immediately or as soon as possible 
 ■
after the spill occurs (Fig. 1-3).
Use disposable gloves and other PPE when  ■
cleaning spills. 
Wipe up the spill with paper towels or other  ■
absorbent material.
If the spill is mixed with sharp objects, such  /ring1
as broken glass or needles, do not pick these 
up with your hands. Use tongs, a broom and 
dustpan or two pieces of cardboard to scoop 
up the sharp objects. 
After the area has been wiped up, ﬂ ood the area 
 ■
with an appropriate disinfectant, such as a solution 
of approximately 1
1⁄2 cups of liquid chlorine bleach 
FOCUS ON PREPAREDNESS (Continued )
1 adhesive cloth tape (10 yards x 1 inch) /ring1
5 antibiotic ointment packets  /ring1
(approximately 1 gram each)
5 antiseptic wipe packets /ring1
2 packets of chewable aspirin  /ring1
(81 mg each) 
1 blanket (space blanket) 
 /ring1
1 CPR breathing barrier (with one-way  /ring1
valve)
1 instant cold compress
 /ring1
2 pairs of non-latex gloves (size: large) /ring1
2 hydrocortisone ointment packets  /ring1
(approximately 1 gram each)
Scissors
 /ring1
1 roller bandage (3 inches wide) /ring1
1 roller bandage (4 inches wide) /ring1
5 sterile gauze pads (3 x 3 inches) /ring1
5 sterile gauze pads (4 x 4 inches) /ring1
Oral thermometer (nonmercury/nonglass) /ring1
2 triangular bandages /ring1
Tweezers /ring1
First aid instruction booklet /ring1
For items to include in a workplace ﬁ rst aid kit, see 
the latest ANSI/ISEA-Z308-1 standard for minimum 
requirements.
Be Prepared
Learn and practice CPR and ﬁ  rst aid skills. ■
Learn how to use an AED for victims of  ■
sudden cardiac arrest.
FIGURE 1-3 Cleaning up a blood spill
 

--- Page 20 ---
8  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
to 1 gallon of fresh water (1 part bleach 
per 9 parts water), and allow it to stand for 
at least 10 minutes.
Dispose of the contaminated material used 
 ■
to clean up the spill in a labeled biohazard 
container.
Contact your worksite safety representative  ■
or your local health department regarding 
the proper disposal of potentially infectious 
material. For more information on preventing 
disease transmission, visit the federal 
Occupational Safety and Health administration: 
http://www.osha.gov/SLTC/bloodbornepathogens/
index.html.
TAKING ACTION: 
 EMERGENCY ACTION STEPS
In any emergency situation, follow the emergency action 
steps:
1. CHECK the scene and the person.
2. CALL  9-1-1 or the local emergency number.
3. CARE  for the person. 
CHECK
Before you can help an injured or ill person, make sure 
that the scene is safe for you and any bystanders (Fig. 1-4). 
Look the scene over and try to answer these questions:
FOCUS ON PREVENTION
AIDS is a condition caused by HIV. When HIV 
infects the body, it damages the body’s immune 
system and impairs its ability to ﬁ ght other infections. 
The virus can grow quietly for months or even years. 
People infected with HIV might not feel or look sick. 
Eventually, the weakened immune system allows 
certain types of infections to develop. This condition 
is known as AIDS. People with AIDS eventually 
develop life-threatening infections, which can cause 
them to die. Because currently there is no vaccine 
against HIV, prevention still is the best tool. 
The two most likely ways for HIV to be transmitted 
during care would be through:
Unprotected direct contact with infected  ■
blood. This type of transmission could 
happen if infected blood or body ﬂ uids from 
one person enter another person’s body at a 
correct entry site. For example, a responder 
could contract HIV if the infected person’s 
blood splashes in the responder’s eye or if 
the responder directly touches the infected 
person’s body ﬂ uids.
Unprotected indirect contact with infected 
 ■
blood. This type of transmission could happen 
if a person touches an object that contains 
the blood or other body ﬂ uids of an infected 
person, and that infected blood or other body 
ﬂ uid enters the body through a correct entry 
site. For example, HIV could be transmitted if 
a responder picks up a blood-soaked bandage 
with a bare hand and the infected blood enters 
the responder’s hand through a cut in the skin.
The virus cannot enter through the skin unless there 
is a cut or break in the skin. Even then, the possibility 
of infection is very low unless there is direct contact 
for a lengthy period of time. Saliva is not known to 
transmit HIV. 
The likelihood of HIV transmission during a ﬁ rst 
aid situation is very low. Always give care in ways 
that protect you and the person from disease 
transmission. For more information on preventing 
HIV transmission, see the Preventing Disease 
Transmission section in this chapter.
If you think you have put yourself at risk for an 
infectious disease, get tested. Tests are readily 
available and will tell whether your body is producing 
antibodies in response to the virus. If you are not 
sure whether you should be tested, call your health 
care provider, the public health department, an AIDS 
service organization or the AIDS hotline listed in the 
next paragraph.
If you have any questions about AIDS, call the 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), 
24 hours a day, for information in English and Spanish 
at 1-800-232-4636. (TTY service is available at 
1-888-232-6348.) You also can visit www.aids.gov 
or call your local or state health department.
HIV AND AIDS
 

--- Page 21 ---
  CHAPTER  1    |    Before Giving Care and Checking an Injured or Ill Person 9
Is it safe? ■
Is immediate danger involved? ■
What happened? ■
How many people are involved? ■
Is anyone else available to help? ■
What is wrong? ■
Is It Safe? 
Check for anything unsafe, such as spilled chemicals, 
trafﬁ c, ﬁ re, escaping steam, downed electrical lines, 
smoke or extreme weather. Avoid going into conﬁ ned 
areas with no ventilation or fresh air, places where 
there might be poisonous gas, collapsed structures, or 
places where natural gas, propane or other substances 
could explode. Such areas should be entered by 
responders who have special training and equipment, 
such as respirators and self-contained breathing 
apparatus. 
If these or other dangers threaten, stay at a safe 
distance and call 9-1-1 or the local emergency number 
immediately. If the scene still is unsafe after you call, 
do not enter. Dead or injured heroes are no help to 
anyone! Leave dangerous situations to professionals like 
ﬁ reﬁ ghters and police. Once they make 
the scene safe, you can offer to help.
Is Immediate Danger Involved? 
Do not move a seriously injured person 
unless there is an immediate danger, 
such as ﬁ re, ﬂ ood or poisonous gas; you 
have to reach another person who may 
have a more serious injury or illness; or 
you need to move the injured person to 
give proper care and you are able to do 
so without putting yourself in danger 
from the ﬁ re, ﬂ ood or poisonous gas. 
If you must move the person, do it as 
quickly and carefully as possible. If 
there is no danger, tell the person not to 
move. Tell any bystanders not to move 
the person.
What Happened? 
Look for clues to what caused the 
emergency and how the person might be 
injured. Nearby objects, such as a fallen 
ladder, broken glass or a spilled bottle 
of medicine, may give you information. 
Your check of the scene may be the only 
way to tell what happened.
If the injured or ill person is a child, 
keep in mind that he or she may have 
been moved by well-meaning adults. Be sure to ask 
about this when you are checking out what happened. 
If you ﬁ nd that a child has been moved, ask the adult 
where the child was and how he or she was found.
How Many People Are Involved? 
Look carefully for more than one person. You might 
not spot everyone at ﬁ rst. If one person is bleeding or 
screaming, you might not notice an unconscious person. 
It also is easy to overlook a small child or an infant. 
In an emergency with more than one injured or ill 
person, you may need to prioritize care (in other words, 
decide who needs help ﬁ rst).
Is Anyone Else Available to Help? 
You already have learned that the presence of 
bystanders does not mean that a person is receiving 
help. You may have to ask them to help. Bystanders 
may be able to tell you what happened or make the call 
for help while you provide care. If a family member, 
friend or co-worker is present, he or she may know if the 
person is ill or has a medical condition. 
The injured or ill person may be too upset to answer 
your questions. Anyone who awakens after having been 
FIGURE 1-4 Check the scene for anything that may threaten the safety of you, the injured 
persons and bystanders.
 

--- Page 22 ---
10  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
unconscious also may be frightened. Bystanders can 
help to comfort the person and others at the scene. 
A child may be especially frightened. Parents or 
guardians who are present may be able to calm a 
frightened child. They also can tell you if a child has 
a medical condition.
What Is Wrong? 
When you reach the person, try to ﬁ nd out what 
is wrong. Look for signals that may indicate a 
life-threatening emergency. First, check to see if the 
injured or ill person is conscious (Fig. 1-5). Sometimes 
this is obvious. The person may be able to speak to you. 
He or she may be moaning, crying, making some other 
noise or moving around. If the person is conscious, 
reassure him or her and try to ﬁ nd out what happened. 
If the person is lying on the ground, silent and not 
moving, he or she may be unconscious. If you are not 
sure whether someone is unconscious, tap him or her 
on the shoulder and ask if he or she is OK. Use the 
person’s name if you know it. Speak loudly. If you are 
not sure whether an infant is unconscious, check 
by tapping the infant’s shoulders and shouting 
or ﬂ icking the bottom of the infant’s foot to see if the 
infant responds. 
Unconsciousness is a life-threatening emergency. 
If the person does not respond to you in any way, assume 
that he or she is unconscious. Make sure that someone 
calls 9-1-1 or the local emergency number right away. 
For purposes of ﬁ  rst aid, an adult is deﬁ ned as 
someone about age 12 (adolescent) or older; someone 
between the ages of 1 and 12 is considered to be a child; 
and an infant is someone younger than 1 year. When using 
an AED, a child is considered to be someone between the 
ages of 1 and 8 years or weighing less than 55 pounds.
Look for other signals of life-threatening injuries 
including trouble breathing, the absence of breathing or 
breathing that is not normal, and/or severe bleeding. 
While you are checking the person, use your senses of 
sight, smell and hearing. They will help you to notice 
anything abnormal. For example, you may notice an 
unusual smell that could be caused by a poison. You 
may see a bruise or a twisted arm or leg. You may hear 
the person say something that explains how he or she 
was injured.
Checking Children and the Elderly 
Keep in mind that it is often helpful to take a slightly 
different approach when you check and care for 
children, infants and elderly people in an emergency 
situation. For more information on checking and caring 
for children, infants, the elderly and others with special 
needs, see Chapter 9.
Identifying Life-Threatening Conditions
At times you may be unsure if advanced medical 
personnel are needed. Your ﬁ rst aid training will 
help you to make this decision. The most important 
step you can take when giving care to a person who 
is unconscious or has some other life-threatening 
condition is to call for emergency medical help. With a 
life-threatening condition, the survival of a person often 
depends on both emergency medical help and the care 
you can give. You will have to use your best judgment—
based on the situation, your assessment of the injured 
or ill person, information gained from this course and 
other training you may have received—to make the 
decision to call. When in doubt, and you think a 
life-threatening condition is present, make the call. 
CALL
Calling 9-1-1 or the local emergency number for help 
often is the most important action you can take to 
help an injured or ill person (Fig. 1-6). It will send 
emergency medical help on its way as fast as possible. 
Make the call quickly and return to the person. If 
possible, ask someone else to make the call.
As a general rule, call 9-1-1 or the local emergency 
number if the person has any of the following conditions:
Unconsciousness or an altered level of consciousness 
 ■
(LOC), such as drowsiness or confusion
Breathing problems (trouble breathing or no breathing) ■
Chest pain, discomfort or pressure lasting more than  ■
a few minutes that goes away and comes back or that 
radiates to the shoulder, arm, neck, jaw, stomach or back
Persistent abdominal pain or pressure ■
Severe external bleeding (bleeding that spurts  ■
or gushes steadily from a wound)
Vomiting blood or passing blood
 ■
Severe (critical) burns ■
Suspected poisoning ■
FIGURE 1-5 When you reach the person, ﬁ  rst check to see if he or 
she is conscious.
 

--- Page 23 ---
  CHAPTER  1    |    Before Giving Care and Checking an Injured or Ill Person 11
CARE
Once you have checked the scene and the person and have 
made a decision about calling 9-1-1 or the local emergency 
number, you may need to give care until EMS personnel 
take over. After making the 9-1-1 call, immediately go 
back to the injured or ill person. Check the person for 
life-threatening conditions and give the necessary care 
(see Checking a Conscious and Unconscious Person section 
in this chapter). To do so, follow these general guidelines:
Do no further harm. 
 ■
Monitor the person’s breathing and consciousness. ■
Help the person rest in the most comfortable position. ■
Keep the person from getting chilled or overheated. ■
Reassure the person. ■
Give any speciﬁ  c care as needed. ■
Transporting the Person Yourself 
In some cases, you may decide to take the injured or ill 
person to a medical facility yourself instead of waiting 
for EMS personnel. NEVER transport a person:
When the trip may aggravate the injury or illness or 
 ■
cause additional injury.
When the person has or may develop a life- ■
threatening condition.
If you are unsure of the nature of the injury or illness.
 ■
If you decide it is safe to transport the person, 
ask someone to come with you to keep the person 
comfortable. Also, be sure you know the quickest route 
to the nearest medical facility capable of handling 
emergency care. Pay close attention to the injured or ill 
person and watch for any changes in his or her condition.
Discourage an injured or ill person from driving him- or 
herself to the hospital. An injury may restrict movement, 
or the person may become groggy or faint. A sudden 
onset of pain may be distracting. Any of these conditions 
can make driving dangerous for the person, passengers, 
other drivers and pedestrians.
Moving an Injured or Ill Person
One of the most dangerous threats to a seriously injured 
or ill person is unnecessary movement. Moving an injured 
person can cause additional injury and pain and may 
complicate his or her recovery. Generally, you should not 
move an injured or ill person while giving care. However, 
it would be appropriate in the following three situations:
1.  When you are faced with immediate danger, 
such as ﬁ re, lack of oxygen, risk of explosion or a 
collapsing structure.
2.  When you have to get to another person who may 
have a more serious problem. In this case, you 
may have to move a person with minor injuries to 
reach someone needing immediate care.
Seizures
 ■
Stroke (sudden weakness on one side of the face/ ■
facial droop, sudden weakness on one side of the 
body, sudden slurred speech or trouble getting words 
out or a sudden, severe headache) 
Suspected or obvious injuries to the head, neck or spine
 ■
Painful, swollen, deformed areas (suspected broken  ■
bone) or an open fracture
Also call 9-1-1 or the local emergency number 
immediately for any of these situations: 
Fire or explosion ■
Downed electrical wires ■
Swiftly moving or rapidly rising water ■
Presence of poisonous gas ■
Serious motor-vehicle collisions ■
Injured or ill persons who cannot be moved easily ■
Deciding to Call First or Care First
If you are ALONE:
Call First ■  (call 9-1-1 or the local emergency number 
before giving care) for:
Any adult or child about 12 years of age or older  /ring1
who is unconscious.
A child or an infant who you witnessed  /ring1
suddenly collapse.
An unconscious child or infant known to have 
 /ring1
heart problems. 
Care First ■  (give 2 minutes of care, then call 9-1-1 or 
the local emergency number) for:
An unconscious child (younger than about  /ring1
12 years of age) who you did not see collapse. 
Any drowning victim.
 /ring1
Call First situations are likely to be cardiac emergencies, 
where time is a critical factor. In Care First situations, the 
conditions often are related to breathing emergencies.
FIGURE 1-6 Calling 9-1-1 or your local emergency number is 
important because getting emergency help fast greatly increases a 
person’s chances of survival. 
 

--- Page 24 ---
12  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
3.  When it is necessary to give proper care. For 
example, if someone needed CPR, he or she might 
have to be moved from a bed because CPR needs 
to be performed on a ﬁ rm, ﬂ at surface. If the 
surface or space is not adequate to give care, the 
person should be moved.
Techniques for Moving an Injured 
or Ill Person
Once you decide to move an injured or ill person, you 
must quickly decide how to do so. Carefully consider 
your safety and the safety of the person. Move an injured 
or ill person only when it is safe for you to do so and 
there is an immediate life threat. Base your decision 
on the dangers you are facing, the size and condition of 
the person, your abilities and physical condition, and 
whether you have any help.
To improve your chances of successfully moving an injured 
or ill person without injuring yourself or the person:
Use your legs, not your back, when you bend. 
 ■
Bend at the knees and hips and avoid twisting  ■
your body.
Walk forward when possible, taking small steps and  ■
looking where you are going.
Avoid twisting or bending anyone with a possible 
 ■
head, neck or spinal injury. 
Do not move a person who is too large to 
 ■
move comfortably.
You can move a person to safety in many different ways, 
but no single way is best for every situation. The objective 
is to move the person without injuring yourself or causing 
further injury to the person. The following common types 
of emergency moves can all be done by one or two people 
and with minimal to no equipment.
Types of Non-Emergency Moves 
Walking Assist
The most basic emergency move is the walking assist. 
Either one or two responders can use this method with 
a conscious person. To perform a walking assist, place 
the injured or ill person’s arm across your shoulders 
and hold it in place with one hand. Support the person 
with your other hand around the person’s waist 
(Fig. 1-7, A). In this way, your body acts as a crutch, 
supporting the person’s weight while you both walk. 
A second responder, if present, can support the person 
in the same way on the other side (Fig. 1-7, B). Do not 
use this assist if you suspect that the person has a head, 
neck or spinal injury.
Two-Person Seat Carry
The two-person seat carry requires a second responder. 
This carry can be used for any person who is conscious 
and not seriously injured. Put one arm behind the 
person’s thighs and the other across the person’s back. 
Interlock your arms with those of a second responder 
behind the person’s legs and across his or her back. 
Lift the person in the “seat” formed by the responders’ 
arms (Fig. 1-8). Responders should coordinate their 
movement so they walk together. Do not use this 
assist if you suspect that the person has a head, 
neck or spinal injury.
Types of Emergency Moves 
Pack-Strap Carry
The pack-strap carry can be used with conscious and 
unconscious persons. Using it with an unconscious 
person requires a second responder to help position 
the injured or ill person on your back. To perform the 
FIGURE 1-7, A–B A, In a walking assist, your body acts as a crutch, supporting the person’s weight while you both 
walk. B, Two responders may be needed for the walking assist.
A B
 

--- Page 25 ---
  CHAPTER  1    |    Before Giving Care and Checking an Injured or Ill Person 13
pack-strap carry, have the person stand or have a second 
responder support the person. Position yourself with 
your back to the person, back straight, knees bent, so 
that your shoulders ﬁ t into the person’s armpits. 
Cross the person’s arms in front of you and grasp the 
person’s wrists. Lean forward slightly and pull the 
person up and onto your back. Stand up and walk to 
safety (Fig. 1-9). Depending on the size of the person, 
you may be able to hold both of his or her wrists with 
one hand, leaving your other hand free to help maintain 
balance, open doors and remove obstructions. Do not 
use this assist if you suspect that the person has a head, 
neck or spinal injury.
Clothes Drag 
The clothes drag can be used to move a conscious or 
unconscious person with a suspected head, neck or 
spinal injury. This move helps keep the person’s head, 
neck and back stabilized. Grasp the person’s clothing 
behind the neck, gathering enough to secure a ﬁ rm grip. 
Using the clothing, pull the person (headﬁ rst) to safety 
(Fig. 1-10). 
During this move, the person’s head is cradled by 
clothing and the responder’s arms. Be aware that this 
move is exhausting and may cause back strain for the 
responder, even when done properly.
Blanket Drag
The blanket drag can be used to move a person in an 
emergency situation when equipment is limited. Keep 
the person between you and the blanket. Gather half of 
the blanket and place it against the person’s side. Roll 
the person as a unit toward you. Reach over and place 
the blanket so that it is positioned under the person, 
then roll the person onto the blanket. Gather the blanket 
at the head and move the person (Fig. 1-11).
Ankle Drag
Use the ankle drag (also known as the foot drag) to 
move a person who is too large to carry or move in any 
other way. Firmly grasp the person’s ankles and move 
backward. The person’s arms should be crossed on his 
FIGURE 1-10 The clothes drag
FIGURE 1-11 The blanket drag
FIGURE 1-8 The two-person seat carry
FIGURE 1-9 The pack-strap carry
 

--- Page 26 ---
14  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
or her chest. Pull the person in a straight line, being 
careful not to bump the person’s head (Fig. 1-12).
Reaching a Person in the Water
Do not enter the water unless you are speciﬁ cally 
trained to perform in-water rescues. Get help from 
a trained responder, such as a lifeguard, to get the 
person out of the water as quickly and safely as possible. 
You can help a person in trouble in the water from a safe 
position by using reaching assists, throwing assists or 
wading assists. 
When possible, start by talking to the person. Let the 
person know that help is coming. If noise is a problem or 
if the person is too far away to hear you, use nonverbal 
communication. Direct the person what to do, such as 
grasping a line, ring buoy or other object that ﬂ oats. Ask 
the person to move toward you, which may be done by 
using the back ﬂ oat with slight leg movements or small 
strokes. Some people can reach safety by themselves 
with the calm and encouraging assistance of someone 
calling to them.
Reaching Assists.
 ■  Firmly brace yourself on 
a pool deck, pier or shoreline and reach out to 
the person with any object that will extend your 
reach, such as a pole, oar or paddle, tree branch, 
shirt, belt or towel. If no equipment is available, 
you can still perform a reaching assist by lying 
down and extending your arm or leg for the 
person to grab.
Throwing Assists. 
 ■ An effective way to rescue 
someone beyond your reach is to throw a ﬂ oating 
object out to the person with a line attached. 
Once the person grasps the object, pull the 
individual to safety. Throwing equipment includes 
heaving lines, ring buoys, throw bags or any 
ﬂ oating object available, such as a picnic jug, 
small cooler, buoyant cushion, kickboard or 
extra life jacket.
Wading Assists. 
 ■ If the water is safe and shallow 
enough (not over your chest), you can wade in 
to reach the person. If there is a current or the 
bottom is soft or unknown, making it dangerous 
to wade, do not go in the water. If possible, wear 
a life jacket and take something with you to 
extend your reach, such as a ring buoy, buoyant 
cushion, kickboard, life jacket, tree branch, pole, 
air mattress, plastic cooler, picnic jug, paddle or 
water exercise belt. 
CHECKING A CONSCIOUS 
PERSON 
If you determine that an injured or ill person is 
conscious and has no immediate life-threatening 
conditions, you can begin to check for other conditions 
that may need care. Checking a conscious person with 
no immediate life-threatening conditions involves two 
basic steps:
Interview the person and bystanders.
 ■
Check the person from head to toe. ■
Conducting Interviews
Ask the person and bystanders simple questions to learn 
more about what happened. Keep these interviews brief 
(Fig. 1-13). Remember to ﬁ rst identify yourself and to 
get the person’s consent to give care. Begin by asking 
the person’s name. This will make him or her feel more 
comfortable. Gather additional information by asking 
the person the following questions:
What happened?
 ■
Do you feel pain or discomfort anywhere? ■
Do you have any allergies? ■
Do you have any medical conditions or are you taking  ■
any medication?
FIGURE 1-12 The ankle drag
FIGURE 1-13 Ask simple questions and keep interviews brief.
 

--- Page 27 ---
  CHAPTER  1    |    Before Giving Care and Checking an Injured or Ill Person 15
If the person feels pain, ask him or her to describe 
it and to tell you where it is located. Descriptions often 
include terms such as burning, crushing, throbbing, 
aching or sharp pain. Ask when the pain started and 
what the person was doing when it began. Ask the 
person to rate his or her pain on a scale of 1 to 10 
(1 being mild and 10 being severe).
Sometimes an injured or ill person will not be able to give 
you the information that you need. The person may not 
speak your language. In some cases, the person may not 
be able to speak because of a medical condition. Known 
as a laryngectomee, a person whose larynx (voice box) 
was surgically removed breathes through a permanent 
opening, or stoma, in the neck and may not be able to 
speak. Remember to question family members, friends 
or bystanders as well. They may be able to give you 
helpful information or help you to communicate with 
the person. You will learn more about communicating 
with people with special needs in Chapter 9. 
Children or infants may be frightened. They may be fully 
aware of you but still unable to answer your questions. 
In some cases, they may be crying too hard and be 
unable to stop. Approach slowly and gently, and give 
the child or infant some time to get used to you. Use the 
child’s name, if you know it. Get down to or below the 
child’s eye level.
Write down the information you learn during the 
interviews or, preferably, have someone else write it down 
for you. Be sure to give the information to EMS personnel 
when they arrive. It may help them to determine the type 
of medical care that the person should receive.
Checking from Head to Toe
Next you will need to thoroughly check the injured or 
ill person so that you do not overlook any problems. 
Visually check from head to toe. When checking a 
conscious person:
Do not move any areas where there is pain or 
 ■
discomfort, or if you suspect a head, neck or 
spinal injury.
Check the person’s head by examining the scalp, face, 
 ■
ears, mouth and nose. 
Look for cuts, bruises, bumps or depressions. Think 
 ■
of how the body usually looks. If you are unsure if a 
body part or limb looks injured, check it against the 
opposite limb or the other side of the body.
Watch for changes in consciousness. Notice if the 
 ■
person is drowsy, confused or is not alert.
Look for changes in the person’s breathing. A healthy 
 ■
person breathes easily, quietly, regularly and without 
discomfort or pain. Young children and infants generally 
breathe faster than adults. Breathing that is not normal 
includes noisy breathing, such as gasping for air; 
rasping, gurgling or whistling sounds; breathing that is 
unusually fast or slow; and breathing that is painful. 
Notice how the skin looks and feels. Skin can provide 
 ■
clues that a person is injured or ill. Feel the person’s 
forehead with the back of your hand to determine if 
the skin feels unusually damp, dry, cool or hot 
(Fig. 1-14). Note if it is red, pale or ashen.
Look over the body. Ask again about any areas that 
 ■
hurt. Ask the person to move each part of the body 
that does not hurt. Ask the person to gently move his 
or her head from side to side. Check the shoulders by 
asking the person to shrug them. Check the chest and 
abdomen by asking the person to take a deep breath. 
Ask the person to move his or her ﬁ  ngers, hands and 
arms; and then the toes, legs and hips in the same way. 
Watch the person’s face and listen for signals of 
discomfort or pain as you check for injuries.
Look for a medical identiﬁ cation (ID) tag, bracelet 
 ■
or necklace (Fig. 1-15) on the person’s wrist, neck or 
ankle. A tag will provide medical information about 
the person, explain how to care for certain conditions 
FIGURE 1-14 Feel the forehead with the back of your hand to 
determine its temperature.
FIGURE 1-15 Medical ID tags and bracelets can provide important 
information about an injured or ill person. Courtesy of the Canadian 
Red Cross.
 

--- Page 28 ---
16  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
and list whom to call for help. For example, a person 
with diabetes may have some form of medical ID tag, 
bracelet or necklace identifying this condition.
If a child or an infant becomes extremely upset, conduct 
a toe-to-head check of the child or infant. This will be less 
emotionally threatening. Parents or guardians who are 
present may be able to calm a frightened child. In fact, 
it often is helpful to check a young child while he or she 
is seated in his or her parent’s or guardian’s lap. Parents 
also can tell you if a child has a medical condition. 
When you have ﬁ nished checking, determine if the 
person can move his or her body without any pain. 
If the person can move without pain and there are 
no other signals of injury, have him or her attempt to 
rest in a sitting position or other comfortable position 
(Fig. 1-16). When the person feels ready, help him or her 
to stand up. Determine what additional care is needed 
and whether to call 9-1-1 or the local emergency number.
SHOCK
When the body is healthy, three conditions are needed 
to keep the right amount of blood ﬂ owing:
The heart must be working well.
 ■
An adequate amount of oxygen-rich blood must be  ■
circulating in the body.
The blood vessels must be intact and able to adjust  ■
blood ﬂ ow.
Shock is a condition in which the circulatory system 
fails to deliver enough oxygen-rich blood to the body’s 
tissues and vital organs. The body’s organs, such as the 
brain, heart and lungs, do not function properly without 
this blood supply. This triggers a series of responses that 
produce speciﬁ  c signals known as shock. These responses 
are the body’s attempt to maintain adequate blood ﬂ ow.
When someone is injured or becomes suddenly ill, 
these normal body functions may be interrupted. In 
cases of minor injury or illness, this interruption is brief 
because the body is able to compensate quickly. With 
more severe injuries or illnesses, however, the body may 
be unable to adjust. When the body is unable to meet 
its demand for oxygen because blood fails to circulate 
adequately, shock occurs.
What to Look For
The signals that indicate a person may be going into 
shock include:
Restlessness or irritability.
 ■
Altered level of consciousness. ■
Nausea or vomiting. ■
Pale, ashen or grayish, cool, moist skin. ■
Rapid breathing and pulse. ■
Excessive thirst. ■
Be aware that the early signals of shock may not be 
present in young children and infants. However, because 
children are smaller than adults, they have less blood 
volume and are more susceptible to shock. 
When to Call 9-1-1 
In cases where the person is going into shock, call 9-1-1 
or the local emergency number immediately. Shock 
cannot be managed effectively by ﬁ rst aid alone. 
A person suffering from shock requires emergency 
medical care as soon as possible. 
What to Do Until Help Arrives 
Caring for shock involves the following simple steps:
Have the person lie down. ■  This often is the most 
comfortable position. Helping the person rest in 
a more comfortable position may lessen any pain. 
Helping the person to rest comfortably is important 
because pain can intensify the body’s stress and speed 
up the progression of shock.
Control any external bleeding.
 ■
Since you may not be sure of the person’s condition,  ■
leave him or her lying ﬂ at.
Help the person maintain normal body temperature  ■
(Fig. 1-17). If the person is cool, try to cover him or 
her to avoid chilling.
Do not give the person anything to eat or drink, even  ■
though he or she is likely to be thirsty. The person’s 
condition may be severe enough to require surgery, in 
which case it is better if the stomach is empty.
Reassure the person.
 ■
FIGURE 1-16 If there are no signals of obvious injuries, help the 
person into a comfortable position.
 

--- Page 29 ---
  CHAPTER  1    |    Before Giving Care and Checking an Injured or Ill Person 17
Continue to monitor the person’s breathing and for  ■
any changes in the person’s condition. Do not wait 
for signals of shock to develop before caring for the 
underlying injury or illness.
CHECKING AN 
 UNCONSCIOUS PERSON
If you think someone is unconscious, tap him or her 
on the shoulder and ask if he or she is OK. Use the 
person’s name if you know it. Speak loudly. If you are 
not sure whether an infant is unconscious, check by 
tapping the infant’s shoulder and shouting or by ﬂ icking 
the bottom of the infant’s foot to see if the infant 
responds (Fig. 1-18). 
If the person does not respond, call 9-1-1 or the local 
emergency number and check for other life-threatening 
conditions. 
Always check to see if an unconscious person:
Has an open airway and is breathing normally.
 ■
Is bleeding severely. ■
Consciousness, effective (normal) breathing and 
circulation and skin characteristics sometimes are 
referred to as signs of life.
Airway
Once you or someone else has called 9-1-1 or the local 
emergency number, check to see if the person has an 
open airway and is breathing. An open airway allows air 
to enter the lungs for the person to breathe. If the airway 
is blocked, the person cannot breathe. A blocked airway 
is a life-threatening condition. 
When someone is unconscious and lying on his 
 ■
or her back, the tongue may fall to the back of the 
throat and block the airway. To open an unconscious 
person’s airway, push down on his or her forehead 
while pulling up on the bony part of the chin with 
two or three ﬁ ngers of your other hand (Fig. 1-19). 
This procedure, known as the head-tilt/chin-lift 
technique, moves the tongue away from the back 
of the throat, allowing air to enter the lungs. 
For a child: Place one hand on the forehead 
 /ring1
and tilt the head slightly past a neutral position 
FIGURE 1-17 Help the person going into shock to lie down and keep 
him or her from getting chilled or overheated.
FIGURE 1-18 If you are not sure whether an infant is unconscious, 
check by tapping the infant’s shoulder or ﬂ  icking the bottom of the 
infant’s foot.
FIGURE 1-19 Open an unconscious person’s 
airway using the head-tilt/chin-lift technique.
 

--- Page 30 ---
18  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
(the head and chin are neither ﬂ exed downward 
toward the chest nor extended backward). 
For an infant: Place one hand on the forehead and  /ring1
tilt the head to a neutral position while pulling 
up on the bony part of the chin with two or three 
ﬁ ngers of your other hand.
If you suspect that a person has a head, neck or spinal 
 ■
injury, carefully tilt the head and lift the chin just 
enough to open the airway.
Check the person’s neck to see if he or she breathes 
through an opening. A person whose larynx was 
removed may breathe partially or entirely through a 
stoma instead of through the mouth (Fig. 1-20). 
The person may breathe partially or entirely through 
this opening instead of through the mouth and nose. 
It is important to recognize this difference in the way 
a person breathes. This will help you give proper care. 
Breathing 
After opening the airway, quickly check an unconscious 
person for breathing. Position yourself so that you can 
look to see if the person’s chest clearly rises and falls, 
listen for escaping air and feel for it against the side 
of your face. Do this for no more than 10 seconds 
(Fig. 1-21). If the person needs CPR, chest 
compressions must not be delayed. 
Normal breathing is regular, quiet and effortless. 
A person does not appear to be working hard or 
struggling when breathing normally. This means that 
the person is not making noise when breathing, breaths 
are not fast (although it should be noted that normal 
breathing rates in children and infants are faster than 
normal breathing rates in adults) and breathing does 
not cause discomfort or pain. In an unconscious adult 
you may detect an irregular, gasping or shallow breath. 
This is known as an agonal breath. Do not confuse 
this with normal breathing. Care for the person as if 
there is no breathing at all. Agonal breaths do not occur 
frequently in children.
If the person is breathing normally, his or her heart 
is beating and is circulating blood containing oxygen. 
In this case, maintain an open airway by using the 
head-tilt/chin-lift technique as you continue to look for 
other life-threatening conditions.
If an adult is not breathing normally, this person most 
likely needs immediate CPR. 
If a child or an infant is not breathing, give 2 rescue 
breaths. Tilt the head back and lift chin up. Pinch the 
nose shut then make a complete seal over the child’s 
mouth and blow in for about 1 second to make the chest 
clearly rise (Fig. 1-22, A). For an infant, seal your mouth 
over the infant’s mouth and nose (Fig. 1-22, B). Give 
rescue breaths one after the other.
If you witness the sudden collapse of a child, 
assume a cardiac emergency. Do not give 2 rescue 
breaths. CPR needs to be started immediately, just as 
with an adult.
Sometimes you may need to remove food, liquid 
or other objects that are blocking the person’s airway. 
This may prevent the chest from rising when you 
attempt rescue breaths. You will learn how to 
recognize an obstructed airway and give care to the 
person in Chapter 4.
Circulation
It is important to recognize breathing emergencies 
in children and infants and to act before the heart 
stops beating. Adults’ hearts frequently stop beating 
because of disease. Children’s and infants’ hearts, 
however, are usually healthy. When a child’s or 
an infant’s heart stops, it usually is the result of 
a breathing emergency. 
FIGURE 1-20 A stoma is an opening in the neck that allows a 
person to breathe after certain surgeries on the airway. Courtesy of the 
International Association of Laryngectomees. FIGURE 1-21 Check for breathing for no more than 10 seconds.
 

--- Page 31 ---
  CHAPTER  1    |    Before Giving Care and Checking an Injured or Ill Person 19
If an adult is not breathing or is not breathing normally 
and if the emergency is not the result of non-fatal 
drowning or other respiratory cause such as a drug 
overdose, assume that the problem is a cardiac emergency. 
Quickly look for severe bleeding by looking over the 
person’s body from head to toe for signals such as 
blood-soaked clothing or blood spurting out of a wound 
(Fig. 1-23). Bleeding usually looks worse than it is. 
A small amount of blood on a slick surface or mixed 
with water usually looks like a large volume of blood. 
It is not always easy to recognize severe bleeding. 
What to Do Next
If an unconscious person is breathing normally, keep  ■
the person lying face-up and maintain an open airway 
with the head-tilt/chin-lift technique. If the person 
vomits, ﬂ  uids block the airway, or if you must leave 
the person to get help, place him or her into a modiﬁ ed 
high arm in endangered spine (H.A.IN.E.S.) recovery 
position. (Placing an Unconscious Person in a Recovery 
Position is discussed in this chapter.)
If an unconscious adult has irregular, gasping or 
 ■
shallow breaths (agonal breathing) or is not breathing 
at all, begin CPR. You will learn how to perform CPR 
in Chapter 2.
If an unconscious child or infant is not breathing, 
 ■
after giving 2 rescue breaths, perform CPR 
(see Chapter 2). 
If the person is bleeding severely, control the bleeding 
 ■
by applying direct pressure (see Chapter 7). 
Using CPR Breathing Barriers
You might not feel comfortable with giving rescue 
breaths, especially to someone whom you do not know. 
Disease transmission is an understandable worry, even 
though the chance of getting a disease from giving 
rescue breaths is extremely small.
CPR breathing barriers, such as face shields and 
resuscitation masks, create a barrier between your 
mouth and nose and those of the injured or ill person 
(Fig. 1-24). This barrier can help to protect you from 
contact with blood and other body ﬂ uids, such as 
saliva, as you give rescue breaths. These devices 
also protect you from breathing the air that the 
person exhales. Some devices are small enough to 
ﬁ t in your pocket or in the glove compartment of 
your car. You also can keep one in your ﬁ rst aid kit. 
If a face shield is used, switch to a resuscitation mask, if 
available, or when one becomes available. However, you 
should not delay rescue breaths while searching 
FIGURE 1-22, A–B A ,  Give a child 2 rescue breaths with each breath lasting about 1 second. B, For an infant, cover the mouth and nose.
BA
FIGURE 1-23 Check for severe bleeding by quickly looking over the 
person from head to toe.
FIGURE 1-24 CPR breathing barriers, such as face shields and 
resuscitation masks, create a barrier between your mouth and 
nose and the injured or ill person’s mouth.
 

--- Page 32 ---
20  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
for a CPR breathing barrier or by trying to learn how 
to use one.
Pediatric CPR breathing barriers are available and 
should be used to care for children and infants. Always 
use the appropriate equipment for the size of the injured 
or ill person.
Special Situations
When giving rescue breaths while performing CPR, 
you may encounter certain special situations. These 
include air in the stomach; vomiting; mouth-to-nose 
breathing; mouth-to-stoma breathing; persons 
with suspected head, neck or spinal injuries; and 
drowning victims.
Air in the Stomach: When you are giving rescue 
 ■
breaths, be careful to avoid forcing air into the 
person’s stomach instead of the lungs. This may 
happen if you breathe too long, breathe too hard or do 
not open the airway far enough.
To avoid forcing air into the person’s stomach, 
 /ring1
keep the person’s head tilted back. Take a normal 
breath and blow into the person’s mouth, blowing 
just enough to make the chest clearly rise. 
Each rescue breath should last about 1 second 
for an adult, a child or an infant. Pause between 
breaths long enough for the air in the person to 
come out and for you to take another breath.
Air in the stomach can make the person 
 /ring1
vomit and cause complications. When an 
unconscious person vomits, the contents of 
the stomach can get into the lungs and block 
breathing. Air in the stomach also makes it 
harder for the diaphragm— the large muscle 
that controls breathing—to move. This makes 
it harder for the lungs to ﬁ  ll with air.
Vomiting. Even when you are giving rescue breaths 
 ■
properly, the person may vomit. 
If this happens, roll the person onto one side and  /ring1
wipe the mouth clean (Fig. 1-25). If possible, use 
a protective barrier, such as disposable gloves, 
gauze or even a handkerchief when cleaning out 
the mouth. 
Then roll the person on his or her back again and 
 /ring1
continue giving care as necessary.
Mouth-to-Nose Breathing. If you are unable to make  ■
a tight enough seal over the person’s mouth, you can 
blow into the nose (Fig. 1-26). 
With the head tilted back, close the mouth by  /ring1
pushing on the chin. 
Seal your mouth around the person’s nose and  /ring1
breathe into the nose. 
If possible, open the person’s mouth between 
 /ring1
rescue breaths to let the air out.
Mouth-to-Stoma Breathing.  ■ Check the person’s neck 
to see if he or she breathes through a stoma. 
If you discover that the person needing rescue  /ring1
breaths has a stoma, expose his or her entire 
neck down to the breastbone. Remove anything 
covering the stoma that blocks the person’s 
airway. Also, wipe away any secretions 
or blockages.
Keep the airway in a neutral position; do not 
 /ring1
allow the chin or head to ﬂ ex forward toward 
the chest or extend backward as you look, 
listen and feel for normal breathing with 
your ear over the stoma. To give rescue 
breaths, make an airtight seal with your lips 
around the stoma or tracheostomy tube and 
blow in for about 1 second to make the chest 
clearly rise. 
FIGURE 1-25 If the person vomits, roll him or her onto one side and 
wipe the mouth clean.
FIGURE 1-26 If you are unable to make a tight enough seal over the 
person’s mouth, you can blow into the nose.
 

--- Page 33 ---
  CHAPTER  1    |    Before Giving Care and Checking an Injured or Ill Person 21
Give rescue breaths into the stoma at the same  /ring1
rate you would breathe into the mouth when 
performing CPR. Your rescue breaths are 
successful if you see the chest rise and fall and you 
hear and feel air escape from the stoma. 
If the chest does not rise and fall, the person’s 
 /ring1
tracheostomy tube may be blocked. If this 
happens, remove the inner tube and give rescue 
breaths again. 
If you hear or feel air escaping from the person’s 
 /ring1
mouth or nose, the person is a partial neck 
breather. In order to give rescue breaths to a partial 
neck breather, the responder must seal the person’s 
mouth and nose with either his or her hand or a 
tight-ﬁ  tting face mask so that air does not escape 
out of the mouth or nose when you give rescue 
breaths into the stoma or tracheostomy tube. 
You might feel uncomfortable with the thought 
 /ring1
of giving mouth-to-stoma rescue breaths. An 
alternative method is to use a barrier device (see 
Using CPR Breathing Barriers section in this 
chapter). For a neck breather or partial neck 
breather, a round pediatric mask may provide a 
better seal around a stoma or tracheostomy tube 
neck plate (Fig. 1-27). 
Head, Neck and Spinal Injuries. Be especially careful 
 ■
with a person who may have a head, neck or spinal 
injury. These kinds of injuries can result from a 
fall from a height greater than the person’s height, 
an automobile collision or a diving mishap. If you 
suspect such an injury, try not to move the person’s 
head, neck and back. If a child is strapped into a car 
seat, do not remove him or her from it. To give rescue 
breaths to a person whom you suspect has a head, 
neck or spinal injury: 
Minimize movement of the head and neck when 
 /ring1
opening the airway.
Carefully tilt the head and lift the chin just enough  /ring1
to open the airway.
Drowning Victims. For an adult, give 2 rescue  ■
breaths as you would for a child or an infant once you 
determine there is no breathing. If alone, you should 
give 2 minutes of care before calling 9-1-1 (Care First) 
for an unconscious person who has been submerged. 
Do not enter the water unless you are speciﬁ cally trained 
to perform in-water rescues. Get help from a trained 
responder, such as a lifeguard, to get the person out of 
the water as quickly and safely as possible. If the person 
is not breathing, you will have to give proper care. 
Placing an Unconscious Person 
in a Recovery Position
In some cases, the person may be unconscious but 
breathing normally. Generally, that person should 
not be moved from a face-up position, especially if 
there is a suspected spinal injury. However, there are 
a few situations when you should move a person into 
a recovery position whether or not a spinal injury is 
suspected. Examples include situations where you 
are alone and have to leave the person (e.g., to call for 
help), or you cannot maintain an open and clear airway 
because of ﬂ uids or vomit. Fig. 1-28, A–B shows how 
to place a person, whether or not a spinal injury is 
suspected, in a modiﬁ ed H.A.IN.E.S. recovery position. 
Placing a person in this position will help to keep the 
airway open and clear. 
To place an adult or a child in a modiﬁ ed H.A.IN.E.S. 
recovery position:
Kneel at the person’s side.
 ■
Reach across the body and lift the arm farthest  ■
from you up next to the head with the person’s palm 
facing up. 
Take the person’s arm closest to you and place it next  ■
to his or her side. 
Grasp the leg farthest from you and bend it up. 
 ■
Using your hand that is closest to the person’s  ■
head, cup the base of the skull in the palm of your 
hand and carefully slide your forearm under the 
person’s shoulder closest to you. Do not lift or push 
the head or neck.
Place your other hand under the arm and hip closest 
 ■
to you. 
Using a smooth motion, roll the person away from 
 ■
you by lifting with your hand and forearm. Make 
sure the person’s head remains in contact with the 
extended arm and be sure to support the head and 
neck with your hand. 
Stop all movement when the person is on his or 
 ■
her side. 
FIGURE 1-27 To give rescue breaths into a stoma, make an 
airtight seal with your lips around the stoma or use a round pediatric 
resuscitation mask and blow in to make chest clearly rise.
 

--- Page 34 ---
22  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
Bend the knee closest to you and place it on top of the  ■
other knee so that both knees are in a bent position.
Make sure the arm on top is in line with the upper  ■
body. 
If you must leave the person to get help, place  /ring1
the hand of the upper arm palm side down 
with the ﬁ ngers under the head at the armpit of 
the extended lower arm. 
An infant can be placed in a recovery position as would 
be done for an older child. You can also hold an infant in 
a recovery position (Fig. 1-29) by:
Carefully positioning the infant face-down along your 
 ■
forearm.
Supporting the infant’s head and neck with your  ■
other hand while keeping the infant’s mouth and 
nose clear.
Keeping the head and neck slightly lower than 
 ■
the chest. 
INCIDENT STRESS
After responding to an emergency involving a serious 
injury, illness or death, it is not unusual to experience 
acute stress. Sometimes, people who have given ﬁ rst aid 
or performed CPR in these situations feel that they are 
unable to cope with the stress. This feeling is known 
as incident stress. If not appropriately managed, this 
acute stress may lead to a serious condition called 
post-traumatic stress disorder.
Signals of Incident Stress Reactions
Some effects may appear right away whereas others 
may take longer to develop. Signals of incident 
stress include:
Anxiousness and inability to sleep.
 ■
Nightmares. ■
Restlessness and other problems. ■
Confusion. ■
Lower attention span. ■
Poor concentration. ■
Denial. ■
Guilt. ■
Depression. ■
Anger. ■
Nausea. ■
Change in interactions with others. ■
Increased or decreased eating. ■
FIGURE 1-29 An infant recovery position
FIGURE 1-28, A–B A ,   Placing a person in a modiﬁ  ed H.A.IN.E.S. recovery position. B, Placing a person in a modiﬁ  ed H.A.IN.E.S if you must leave 
to call 9-1-1.
A B
 

--- Page 35 ---
  CHAPTER  1    |    Before Giving Care and Checking an Injured or Ill Person 23
Uncharacteristic, excessive humor or silence. ■
Unusual behavior. ■
Difﬁ  culty performing one’s job. ■
Guidelines for Coping with 
Incident Stress
Incident stress may require professional help to 
prevent post-traumatic stress from developing. 
Other things that you may do to help reduce stress 
include using relaxation techniques, eating a balanced 
diet, avoiding alcohol and drugs, getting enough 
rest and participating in some type of physical 
exercise or activity.
PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER
Given the large number of injuries and sudden illnesses 
that occur in the United States each year, it is likely 
that you might have to deal with an emergency 
situation someday. 
Remember that you have a vital role to play in the EMS 
system. This includes following the emergency action 
steps of CHECK—CALL—CARE, which will help you 
to react quickly and calmly in any emergency situation. 
Emergencies happen every day. Be prepared, respond 
immediately and make a difference. 
 

--- Page 36 ---
24  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
SKILL SHEET
REMOVING GLOVES
AFTER GIVING CARE AND MAKING SURE TO NEVER TOUCH THE BARE SKIN 
WITH THE OUTSIDE OF EITHER GLOVE:
  PINCH GLOVE 
Pinch the palm side of one glove near the wrist. 
Carefully pull the glove off so that it is inside out.
  SLIP TWO FINGERS UNDER GLOVE
Hold the glove in the palm of the remaining gloved 
hand. Slip two ﬁ  ngers under the glove at the wrist 
of the remaining gloved hand. 
  PULL GLOVE OFF 
Pull the glove until it comes off, inside out, so that 
the ﬁ  rst glove ends up inside the glove just removed.  DISPOSE OF GLOVES AND WASH HANDS
After removing the gloves:
Dispose of gloves in the appropriate biohazard container. ■
Wash hands thoroughly with soap and warm running water, if available. ■
Otherwise, use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer to clean the hands if they are not visibly soiled. ■
 

--- Page 37 ---
  CHAPTER  1    |    Before Giving Care and Checking an Injured or Ill Person 25
SKILL SHEET
Continued on next page
CHECKING AN INJURED OR ILL ADUL T
 APPEARS TO BE UNCONSCIOUS
 AFTER CHECKING THE SCENE FOR SAFETY, CHECK THE PERSON.
  CHECK FOR RESPONSIVENESS 
Tap the shoulder and shout, “Are you okay?” 
  CALL 9-1-1 
If no response, CALL 9-1-1 or the local emergency number.
If an unconscious person is face-down, roll him or her face-up keeping the head,  ■
neck and back in a straight line.
If the person responds, obtain consent and CALL 9-1-1 or the local emergency number for any 
life-threatening conditions. 
CHECK the person from head to toe and ask questions to ﬁ  nd out what happened.
  OPEN THE AIRWAY 
Tilt head, lift chin.
  CHECK FOR BREATHING 
CHECK for no more than 10 seconds. 
Occasional gasps are not breathing. ■
TIP: Use disposable gloves and other PPE. 
 

--- Page 38 ---
26  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
SKILL SHEET continued
   QUICKL Y SCAN FOR SEVERE 
BLEEDING
  WHAT TO DO NEXT  
IF THERE IS NO BREATHING—Perform CPR or use an AED (if AED is immediately available). ■
IF BREATHING—Maintain an open airway and monitor breathing and for any changes in condition. ■
 

--- Page 39 ---
  CHAPTER  1    |    Before Giving Care and Checking an Injured or Ill Person 27
SKILL SHEET
CHECKING AN INJURED 
OR ILL CHILD OR INFANT
 APPEARS TO BE UNCONSCIOUS
TIP: Use disposable gloves and other PPE. Get consent from 
a parent or guardian, if present.
 AFTER CHECKING THE SCENE FOR SAFETY, CHECK THE CHILD OR INFANT. 
  CHECK FOR RESPONSIVENESS 
Tap the shoulder and shout, “Are you okay?” 
For an infant, you may ﬂ  ick the bottom of the foot.
  CALL 9-1-1  
If no response, CALL 9-1-1 or the local emergency number. 
 ■If an unconscious child or infant is face-down, roll him or her face-up supporting the head, 
neck and back in a straight line. 
If ALONE, give about 
2 minutes of CARE, then CALL 9-1-1. 
If the child or infant responds, CALL 9-1-1 or the local emergency number for any life-threatening 
conditions and obtain consent to give CARE. 
CHECK the child from head to toe and ask questions to ﬁ  nd out what happened.
  OPEN THE AIRWAY  
Tilt head back slightly, lift chin. 
Continued on next page
 

--- Page 40 ---
28  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
  CHECK FOR BREATHING
CHECK for no more than 10 seconds. 
 ■Occasional gasps are not breathing.
 ■Infants have periodic breathing, so changes in 
breathing pattern are normal for infants.
  GIVE 2 RESCUE BREATHS 
If no breathing, give 2 rescue breaths.
 ■Tilt the head back and lift the chin up.
 ■Child: Pinch the nose shut, then make a complete seal 
over child’s mouth.
 ■Infant: Make complete seal over infant’s mouth and nose.
 ■Blow in for about 1 second to make the chest clearly rise.
 ■Give rescue breaths, one after the other. 
TIPS: 
  If you witnessed the child or infant suddenly collapse, skip 
rescue breaths and start CPR.
  If the chest does not rise with the initial rescue breath, 
retilt the head before giving the second breath. 
  QUICKL Y SCAN FOR SEVERE BLEEDING
  WHAT TO DO NEXT  
 ■IF THE SECOND BREATH DOES NOT MAKE THE CHEST RISE—The child or infant may be 
choking. Give CARE for unconscious choking by performing CPR, starting with compressions.
 ■IF THERE IS NO BREATHING—Perform CPR or use an AED (if AED is immediately available). 
 ■IF BREATHING—Maintain an open airway. Monitor breathing and for any changes in condition.
SKILL SHEET continued
 

--- Page 41 ---
Cardiac Emergencies and CPR
CHAPTER   2
  CHAPTER  2    |    Cardiac Emergencies and CPR 29
C
ardiac emergencies are life threatening. Heart attack and cardiac arrest are major causes of illness and death 
in the United States. Every day in U.S. homes, parks and workplaces someone will have a heart attack or 
go into cardiac arrest. Recognizing the signals of a heart attack and cardiac arrest, calling 9-1-1 or the local 
emergency number and giving immediate care in a cardiac emergency saves lives. Performing CPR and using an 
automated external deﬁ  brillator (AED) immediately after a person goes into cardiac arrest can greatly increase his 
or her chance of survival. 
In this chapter you will ﬁ  nd out what signals to look for if you suspect a person is having a heart attack or has gone into 
cardiac arrest. This chapter also discusses how to care for a person having a heart attack and how to perform CPR for a 
person in cardiac arrest. In addition, this chapter covers the important links in the Cardiac Chain of Survival. 
Although cardiac emergencies occur more commonly in adults, they also occur in infants and children. This chapter 
discusses the causes of cardiac arrest and how to provide care for all age groups. 
 

--- Page 42 ---
30   First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
BACKGROUND
The heart is a fascinating organ. It beats more than 3 
billion times in an average lifetime. The heart is about 
the size of a ﬁ st and lies between the lungs in the middle 
of the chest. It pumps blood throughout the body. The 
ribs, breastbone and spine protect it from injury. The 
heart is separated into right and left halves (Fig. 2-1). 
Blood that contains little or no oxygen enters the right 
side of the heart and is pumped to the lungs. The blood 
picks up oxygen in the lungs when you breathe. The 
oxygen-rich blood then goes to the left side of the heart 
and is pumped from the heart’s blood vessels, called the 
arteries, to all other parts of the body. The heart and 
your body’s vital organs need this constant supply of 
oxygen-rich blood.
Cardiovascular disease is an abnormal condition that 
affects the heart and blood vessels. An estimated 80 
million Americans suffer from some form of the disease. 
It remains the number one killer in the United States 
and is a major cause of disability. The most common 
conditions caused by cardiovascular disease include 
coronary heart disease, also known as coronary artery 
disease, and stroke, also called a brain attack. 
Coronary heart disease occurs when the arteries that 
supply blood to the heart muscle harden and narrow. 
This process is called atherosclerosis. The damage occurs 
gradually, as cholesterol and fatty deposits called plaque 
build up on the inner artery walls (Fig. 2-2). As this 
build-up worsens, the arteries become narrower. This 
reduces the amount of blood that can ﬂ ow through 
them and prevents the heart from getting the blood and 
oxygen it needs. If the heart does not get blood containing 
oxygen, it will not work properly. Coronary heart disease 
accounts for about half of the greater than 800,000 
adults who die each year from cardiovascular disease. 
When the heart is working normally, it beats evenly 
and easily, with a steady rhythm. When damage to the 
heart causes it to stop working effectively, a person 
can experience a heart attack or other damage to the 
heart muscle. A heart attack can cause the heart to 
beat in an irregular way. This may prevent blood from 
circulating effectively. 
When the heart does not work properly, normal 
breathing can be disrupted or stopped. A heart attack 
also can cause the heart to stop beating entirely. This 
condition is called cardiac arrest. The number one 
cause of heart attack and cardiac arrest in adults is 
coronary heart disease. Other signiﬁ cant causes of 
cardiac arrest are non-heart related (e.g., poisoning 
or drowning). 
HEART ATTACK 
When blood ﬂ ow to the heart muscle is reduced, people 
experience chest pain. This reduced blood ﬂ ow usually 
is caused by coronary heart disease. When the blood and 
oxygen supply to the heart is reduced, a heart attack 
may result. 
FIGURE 2-1 The heart is separated into right and left halves. 
Blood that contains little or no oxygen enters the right side of 
the heart and is pumped to the lungs. The blood picks up 
oxygen in the lungs when you breathe. The oxygen-rich blood 
then goes to the left side of the heart and is pumped to all parts 
of the body.
FIGURE 2-2 Build-up of fatty materials on the inner walls of the arteries 
reduces blood ﬂ  ow to the heart muscle and may cause a heart attack.
Arteries of the heart
Unblocked Partially
blocked
Completely
blocked
Left Atrium 
Left Ventricle 
Right Atrium 
Right Ventricle 
 

--- Page 43 ---
  CHAPTER  2    |    Cardiac Emergencies and CPR 31
What to Look For 
A heart attack can be indicated by common signals. Even 
people who have had a heart attack may not recognize 
the signals, because each heart attack may not show 
the same signals. You should be able to recognize the 
following signals of a heart attack so that you can give 
prompt and proper care:
Chest pain, discomfort or pressure
 ■ . The most 
common signal is persistent pain, discomfort 
or pressure in the chest that lasts longer than 
3 to 5 minutes or goes away and comes back. 
Unfortunately, it is not always easy to distinguish 
heart attack pain from the pain of indigestion, muscle 
spasms or other conditions. This often causes people 
to delay getting medical care. Brief, stabbing pain or 
pain that gets worse when you bend or breathe deeply 
usually is not caused by a heart problem.
The pain associated with a heart attack can range 
 /ring1
from discomfort to an unbearable crushing 
sensation in the chest. 
The person may describe it as pressure, squeezing, 
 /ring1
tightness, aching or heaviness in the chest. 
Many heart attacks start slowly as mild pain 
 /ring1
or discomfort.
Often the person feels pain or discomfort in the 
 /ring1
center of the chest (Fig. 2-3). 
The pain or discomfort becomes constant. 
 /ring1
It usually is not relieved by resting, changing 
position or taking medicine. 
Some individuals may show no signals at all. /ring1
Discomfort in other areas of the upper body in  ■
addition to the chest. Discomfort, pain or pressure 
may also be felt in or spread to the shoulder, arm, 
neck, jaw, stomach or back. 
Trouble breathing
 ■ . Another signal of a heart attack 
is trouble breathing. The person may be breathing 
faster than normal because the body tries to get the 
much-needed oxygen to the heart. The person may 
have noisy breathing or shortness of breath. 
Other signals.
 ■  The person’s skin may be pale or 
ashen (gray), especially around the face. Some people 
suffering from a heart attack may be damp with sweat 
or may sweat heavily, feel dizzy, become nauseous or 
vomit. They may become fatigued, lightheaded or lose 
consciousness. These signals are caused by the stress 
put on the body when the heart does not work as it 
should. Some individuals may show no signals at all.
Differences in signals between men and women
 ■ . Both 
men and women experience the most common signal 
for a heart attack: chest pain or discomfort. However, 
it is important to note that women are somewhat more 
likely to experience some of the other warning signals, 
particularly shortness of breath, nausea or vomiting, 
back or jaw pain and unexplained fatigue or malaise. 
When they do experience chest pain, women may have 
a greater tendency to have atypical chest pain: sudden, 
sharp but short-lived pain outside of the breastbone. 
When to Call 9-1-1 
Remember, the key signal of a heart attack is persistent 
chest pain or discomfort that lasts more than 3 to 5 
minutes or goes away and comes back. If you suspect the 
person is having a heart attack based on his or her signals, 
call 9-1-1 or the local emergency number immediately. A 
person having a heart attack probably will deny that any 
signal is serious. Do not let this inﬂ  uence you. If you think 
the person might be having a heart attack, act quickly.
What to Do Until Help Arrives 
It is important to recognize the signals of a heart attack 
and to act on those signals. Any heart attack might lead 
to cardiac arrest, but prompt action may prevent further 
damage to the heart. A person suffering from a heart 
attack, and whose heart is still beating, has a far better 
chance of living than does a person whose heart has 
stopped. Most people who die of a heart attack die within 
2 hours of the ﬁ  rst signal. Many could have been saved if 
people on the scene or the person having the heart attack 
had been aware of the signals and acted promptly. 
Many people who have heart attacks delay seeking care. 
Nearly half of all heart attack victims wait for 2 hours 
or more before going to the hospital. Often they do not 
realize they are having a heart attack. They may say the 
signals are just muscle soreness, indigestion or heartburn.
FIGURE 2-3 Heart attack pain or pressure is 
often felt in the center of the chest. It may spread 
to the shoulder, arm, neck or jaw.
 

--- Page 44 ---
32  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
Early treatment with certain medications—including 
aspirin—can help minimize damage to the heart after 
a heart attack. To be most effective, these medications 
need to be given within 1 hour of the start of heart 
attack signals. 
If you suspect that someone might be having a heart 
attack, you should:
Call 9-1-1 or the local emergency number immediately. 
 ■
Have the person stop what he or she is doing and rest  ■
comfortably (Fig. 2-4). This will ease the heart’s need 
for oxygen. Many people experiencing a heart attack 
ﬁ nd it easier to breathe while sitting.
Loosen any tight or uncomfortable clothing.
 ■
Closely watch the person until advanced medical  ■
personnel take over. Notice any changes in the 
person’s appearance or behavior. Monitor the 
person’s condition.
Be prepared to perform CPR and use an AED, if 
 ■
available, if the person loses consciousness and stops 
breathing. 
Ask the person if he or she has a history of heart  ■
disease. Some people with heart disease take 
prescribed medication for chest pain. You can help by 
getting the medication for the person and assisting 
him or her with taking the prescribed medication.
Offer aspirin, if med  i cally appropriate and local 
 ■
protocols allow, and if the patient can swallow and 
has no known contraindications (see the following 
section). Be sure that the person has not been 
FOCUS ON PREVENTION
CORONARY HEART DISEASE
Recognizing a heart attack and getting the necessary 
care at once may prevent a person from going into 
cardiac arrest. However, preventing a heart attack 
in the ﬁ rst place is even more effective. There is 
no substitute for prevention. 
Heart attacks usually result from disease of the 
heart and blood vessels. Although a heart attack 
may seem to strike suddenly, many people’s lifestyles 
are gradually putting their hearts in danger. 
Because coronary heart disease develops slowly, 
some individuals may not be aware of it for 
many years. Fortunately, it is possible to slow 
the progression of the disease by making lifestyle 
changes.
Many things increase a person’s chances of 
developing coronary heart disease. These are called 
risk factors. Some of them cannot be changed. 
For instance, although more women than men die 
each year from coronary heart disease in the 
United States, heart disease generally affects 
men at younger ages than it does women. 
Besides gender, ethnicity also plays an important 
role in determining the risk for heart disease. African 
Americans and Native Americans have higher rates of 
heart disease than do other U.S. populations. A family 
history of heart disease also increases your risk.
Reducing Risk Factors
There are some risk factors that can be reduced. 
Cigarette smoking, a poor diet, uncontrolled high 
blood cholesterol or high blood pressure, being 
overweight and lack of regular exercise all increase 
your risk of heart disease. When you combine one 
risk factor, like smoking, with others, such as high 
blood pressure and lack of exercise, your risk of 
heart attack is much greater.
By taking steps to control your risk factors, you can 
improve your chances for living a long and healthy 
life. Remember, it is never too late.
The best way to deal with a heart attack or cardiac 
arrest is to prevent it. Begin to reduce your risk of 
heart disease today.
FIGURE 2-4 Comforting the person helps to reduce anxiety and 
eases some of the discomfort.
 

--- Page 45 ---
  CHAPTER  2    |    Cardiac Emergencies and CPR 33
told by his or her health care provider to avoid 
taking aspirin.
Be calm and reassuring. Comforting the person helps  ■
to reduce anxiety and eases some of the discomfort. 
Talk to bystanders and if possible the person to get 
 ■
more information. 
Do not try to drive the person to the hospital yourself. 
 ■
He or she could quickly get worse on the way.
Giving Aspirin to Lessen Heart Attack 
 Damage
You may be able to help a conscious person who is 
showing early signals of a heart attack by offering him or 
her an appropriate dose of aspirin when the signals ﬁ rst 
begin. However, you should never delay calling 9-1-1 
or the local emergency number to do this. Always call 
for help as soon as you recognize the signals of a heart 
attack. Then help the person to be comfortable before 
you give the aspirin. 
If the person is able to take medicine by mouth, ask:
Are you allergic to aspirin?
 ■
Do you have a stomach ulcer or stomach disease? ■
Are you taking any blood thinners, such as warfarin  ■
(Coumadin™)?
Have you ever been told by a doctor to avoid  ■
taking aspirin?
If the person answers no to all of these questions, you 
may offer him or her two chewable (81 mg each) baby 
aspirins, or one 5-grain (325 mg) adult aspirin tablet 
with a small amount of water. Do not use coated aspirin 
products or products meant for multiple uses such as for 
cold, fever and headache. You also may offer these doses 
of aspirin if the person regains consciousness while you 
are giving care and is able to take the aspirin by mouth. 
Be sure that you offer only aspirin and not Tylenol
®, 
acetaminophen or nonsteroidal anti-inﬂ ammatory 
drugs (NSAIDs), such as ibuprofen, Motrin®, Advil®, 
naproxen and Aleve®.
CARDIAC ARREST
Cardiac arrest occurs when the heart stops beating or 
beats too ineffectively to circulate blood to the brain 
and other vital organs. The beats, or contractions, of the 
heart become ineffective if they are weak, irregular or 
uncoordinated, because at that point the blood no longer 
ﬂ ows through the arteries to the rest of the body. 
When the heart stops beating properly, the body cannot 
survive. Breathing will soon stop, and the body’s organs 
will no longer receive the oxygen they need to function. 
Without oxygen, brain damage can begin in about 
4 to 6 minutes, and the damage can become irreversible 
after about 10 minutes. 
A person in cardiac arrest is unconscious, not breathing 
and has no heartbeat. The heart has either stopped 
beating or is beating weakly and irregularly so that 
a pulse cannot be detected.
Cardiovascular disease is the primary cause of cardiac 
arrest in adults. Cardiac arrest also results from 
drowning, choking, drug abuse, severe injury, brain 
damage and electrocution. 
Causes of cardiac arrest in children and infants include 
airway and breathing problems, traumatic injury, a hard 
blow to the chest, congenital heart disease and sudden 
infant death syndrome (SIDS).
Cardiac arrest can happen suddenly, without any of 
the warning signs usually seen in a heart attack. This is 
known as sudden cardiac arrest or sudden cardiac death 
and accounts for more than 300,000 deaths annually 
in the United States. Sudden cardiac arrest is caused by 
abnormal, chaotic electrical activity of the heart (known 
as arrhythmias). The most common life-threatening 
abnormal arrhythmia is ventricular ﬁ brillation (V-ﬁ b).
Cardiac Chain of Survival
CPR alone may not be enough to help someone survive 
cardiac arrest. Advanced medical care is needed as 
soon as possible. A person in cardiac arrest will have 
the greatest chance of survival if you follow the four 
links in the Cardiac Chain of Survival:
1.  Early recognition and early access to the 
emergency medical services (EMS) system. 
The sooner someone calls 9-1-1 or the local 
emergency number, the sooner EMS personnel 
will take over.
2.  Early CPR. CPR helps supply blood containing 
oxygen to the brain and other vital organs. This 
helps to keep the person alive until an AED is 
used or advanced medical care is provided. 
3.  Early deﬁ brillation. An electrical shock, called 
deﬁ brillation, may help to restore an effective 
heart rhythm.
4.  Early advanced medical care. 
EMS personnel provide more advanced medical 
care and transport the person to a hospital.
For each minute that CPR and deﬁ brillation are delayed, 
the chance for survival is reduced by about 10 percent.
In the Cardiac Chain of Survival, each link of the chain 
depends on, and is connected to, the other links. Taking 
quick action by calling 9-1-1 or the local emergency 
number, starting CPR immediately and using an AED, 
if one is available, makes it more likely that a person 
in cardiac arrest will survive. Remember, you are the 
 

--- Page 46 ---
34  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
ﬁ rst link in the Cardiac Chain of Survival. By acting 
quickly, you can make a positive difference for someone 
experiencing a cardiac emergency.
What to Look For
The main signals of cardiac arrest in an adult, a child 
and an infant are unconsciousness and no breathing. 
The presence of these signals means that no blood 
and oxygen are reaching the person’s brain and other 
vital organs. 
When to Call 9-1-1
Call 9-1-1 or the local emergency number immediately 
if you suspect that a person is in cardiac arrest or you 
witness someone suddenly collapse. 
What to Do Until Help Arrives
Perform CPR until an AED is available and ready to use 
or advanced medical personnel take over.
Early CPR and Deﬁ brillation
A person in cardiac arrest needs immediate CPR and 
deﬁ brillation. The cells of the brain and other important 
organs continue to live for a short time—until all of the 
oxygen in the blood is used.  
CPR is a combination of chest compressions and 
rescue breaths. When the heart is not beating, chest 
compressions are needed to circulate blood containing 
oxygen. Given together, rescue breaths and chest 
compressions help to take over for the heart and lungs. 
CPR increases the chances of survival for a person in 
cardiac arrest. 
In many cases, however, CPR alone cannot correct 
the underlying heart problem: deﬁ brillation delivered 
by an AED is needed. This shock disrupts the heart’s 
electrical activity long enough to allow the heart to 
spontaneously develop an effective rhythm on its 
own. Without early CPR and early deﬁ brillation, the 
chances of survival are greatly reduced. (Using an AED is 
discussed in detail in Chapter 3.)
CPR for Adults
To determine if an unconscious adult needs CPR, follow 
the emergency action steps (CHECK—CALL—CARE) 
that you learned in Chapter 1.
CHECK
 ■  the scene and the injured or ill person.
CALL ■  9-1-1 or the local emergency number. 
CHECK ■  for breathing for no more than 10 seconds. 
Quickly ■  CHECK for severe bleeding.
If the person is not breathing, give  ■ CARE by 
beginning CPR.
For chest compressions to be the most effective, the 
person should be on his or her back on a ﬁ rm, ﬂ at 
surface. If the person is on a soft surface like a sofa 
or bed, quickly move him or her to a ﬁ rm, ﬂ at surface 
before you begin.
To perform CPR on an adult:
Position your body correctly by kneeling beside 
 ■
the person’s upper chest, placing your hands in the 
correct position, and keeping your arms and elbows 
as straight as possible so that your shoulders are 
directly over your hands (Fig. 2-5). Your body position 
is important when giving chest compressions. 
Compressing the person’s chest straight down will 
help you reach the necessary depth. Using the correct 
body position also will be less tiring for you.
Locate the correct hand position by placing the heel 
 ■
of one hand on the person’s sternum (breastbone) 
at the center of his or her chest (Fig. 2-6). Place 
FIGURE 2-5 Position yourself so that your shoulders are directly over 
your hands.
FIGURE 2-6 Locate the correct hand position by placing the heel of 
one hand on the person’s sternum (breastbone) in the center of the 
person’s chest.
 

--- Page 47 ---
  CHAPTER  2    |    Cardiac Emergencies and CPR 35
FIGURE 2-8 If you have arthritis in your hands, you 
can give compressions by grasping the wrist of the 
hand positioned on the chest with your other hand.
Give 30 chest compressions. Push hard, push fast  ■
at a rate of at least 100 compressions per minute. 
Note that the term “100 compressions per minute” 
refers to the speed of compressions, not the number 
of compressions given in a minute. As you give 
compressions, count out loud, “One and two and 
three and four and ﬁ ve and six and…” up to 
30. Push down as you say the number and come up 
as you say “and.” This will help you to keep a steady, 
even rhythm.
Give compressions by pushing the sternum 
 ■
down at least 2 inches (Fig. 2-9, A). The downward 
and upward movement should be smooth, not 
jerky. Push straight down with the weight of 
your upper body, not with your arm muscles. 
This way, the weight of your upper body will
 create the force needed to compress the chest. 
Do not rock back and forth. Rocking results in 
less-effective compressions and wastes much-
needed energy. If your arms and shoulders 
tire quickly, you are not using the correct 
body position. 
After each compression, release the pressure on 
 ■
the chest without removing your hands or changing 
hand position (Fig. 2-9, B). Allow the chest to 
return to its normal position before starting the 
next compression. Maintain a steady down-and-up 
rhythm and do not pause between compressions. 
Spend half of the time pushing down and half 
of the time coming up. When you press down, the 
walls of the heart squeeze together, forcing the 
blood to empty out of the heart. When you come 
up, you should release all pressure on the chest, 
but do not take hands off the chest. This allows 
the heart’s chambers to ﬁ  ll with blood between 
compressions.
your other hand directly on top of the ﬁ rst hand 
and try to keep your ﬁ  ngers off of the chest by 
interlacing them or holding them upward (Fig. 2-7). 
If you feel the notch at the end of the sternum, 
move your hands slightly toward the person’s head. 
If you have arthritis in your hands, you can give 
compressions by grasping the wrist of the hand 
positioned on the chest with your other hand 
(Fig. 2-8). The person’s clothing should not 
interfere with ﬁ  nding the proper hand position or 
your ability to give effective compressions. If it does, 
loosen or remove enough clothing to allow deep 
compressions in the center of the person’s chest. 
FIGURE 2-9, A–B To give chest compressions: A , Push straight down 
with the weight of your body. B, Release, allowing the chest to return 
to its normal position.
BA
FIGURE 2-7 Place your other hand directly on top of 
the ﬁ  rst hand. Try to keep your ﬁ  ngers off of the chest 
by interlacing them or holding them upward.
 

--- Page 48 ---
36  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
Once you have given 30 compressions, open the  ■
airway using the head-tilt/chin-lift technique and give 
2 rescue breaths. Each rescue breath should last about 
1 second and make the chest clearly rise. 
Open the airway and give rescue breaths, one 
 /ring1
after the other.
Tilt the head back and lift the chin up. /ring1
Pinch the nose shut then make a complete seal  /ring1
over the person’s mouth.
Blow in for about 1 second to make the chest 
 /ring1
clearly rise.
Continue cycles of chest compressions and rescue  ■
breaths. Each cycle of chest compressions and rescue 
breaths should take about 24 seconds. Minimize the 
interruption of chest compressions.
If Two Responders Are Available
If two responders trained in CPR are at the scene, both 
should identify themselves as being trained. One should 
call 9-1-1 or the local emergency number for help while 
the other performs CPR. If the ﬁ rst responder is tired 
and needs help:
The ﬁ rst responder should tell the second responder 
 ■
to take over.
The second responder should immediately take over  ■
CPR, beginning with chest compressions.
When to Stop CPR
Once you begin CPR, do not stop except in one of these 
situations:
You notice an obvious sign of life, such as  ■
breathing.
An AED is available and ready to use. ■
Another trained responder or EMS personnel take  ■
over (Fig. 2-10).
You are too exhausted to continue.  ■
The scene becomes unsafe. ■
If at any time you notice that the person is breathing, 
stop CPR. Keep his or her airway open and continue 
to monitor the person’s breathing and for any changes 
in the person’s condition until EMS personnel take 
over (Fig. 2-11).
Cardiac Emergencies in Children 
and Infants
It is rare for a child or an infant to initially suffer 
a cardiac emergency. Usually, a child or an infant 
has a respiratory emergency ﬁ rst and then a cardiac 
emergency develops.
Causes of cardiac arrest in children and infants 
include: 
Airway and breathing problems.
 ■
Traumatic injury or an accident (e.g., motor-vehicle  ■
collision, drowning, electrocution or poisoning).
A hard blow to the chest. ■
Congenital heart disease. ■
Sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS). ■
If you recognize that a child or an infant is not breathing, 
begin CPR.
CPR for Children and Infants
Follow the emergency action steps (CHECK—
CALL—CARE) to determine if you will need to 
perform CPR for a child or an infant. The principles 
of CPR (compressing the chest and giving rescue 
breaths) are the same for children and infants as for 
adults. However, the CPR techniques are slightly 
different since children’s and infants’ bodies 
are smaller. 
FIGURE 2-10 Perform CPR until an AED becomes available and is 
ready to use or EMS personnel take over. Courtesy of Terry Georgia.
FIGURE 2-11 Monitor breathing until help arrives.
 

--- Page 49 ---
  CHAPTER  2    |    Cardiac Emergencies and CPR 37
FOCUS ON PREPAREDNESS
Your 85-year-old grand father is living with your 
family. He has a terminal illness and is frequently 
in the hospital.
One afternoon, you go to his room to give him 
lunch. As you start to talk to him, you realize that he 
is unconscious. You check for breathing. He is not 
breathing. What should you do?
No one but you can answer that question. No one 
can advise you. No one can predict the outcome of 
your decision. You alone must decide whether or not 
to give your grandfather CPR.
Endless questions race through your mind. 
Can I face the fact I am losing someone I love? 
Should I always try to perform CPR? What would 
his life be like after resuscitation? What would my 
grand father want? Your mind tells you to perform 
CPR, yet your heart says no.
It is important to realize that it is okay to withhold 
CPR when a terminally ill person is dying. Nature 
takes its course, and in some cases people feel they 
have lived full lives and are prepared for death. 
Advance Directives
Fortunately, this type of heart-wrenching, last-second 
decision sometimes can be avoided if loved ones 
talk to each other in advance about their preferences 
regarding lifesaving treatments. 
Instructions that describe a person’s wishes about 
medical treatment are called advance directives. 
These instructions make known a person’s intentions 
while he or she is still capable of doing so and are 
used when the person can no longer make his or her 
own health-care decisions.
As provided by the Federal Patient Self-Determination 
Act, adults who are admitted to a hospital or a health-
care facility or who receive assistance from certain 
organizations that receive funds from Medicare and 
Medicaid have the right to make fundamental choices 
about their own care. They must be told about their 
right to make decisions about the level of life support 
that would be provided in an emergency situation. 
They are supposed to be offered the opportunity to 
make these choices at the time of admission. 
Conversations with relatives, friends or health care 
providers while the person is still capable of making 
decisions are the most common form of advance 
directives. However, because conversations may not 
be recalled accurately or may not have taken into 
account the illness or emergency now facing the 
person, the courts consider written directives to 
be more reliable.
Two examples of written advance directives are 
living wills and durable powers of attorney for health 
care. The types of health-care decisions covered by 
these documents vary by state. Talking with a legal 
professional can help to determine which advance 
directive options are available in your state and 
what they cover.
If a person establishes a living will, directions for 
health care would be in place before he or she 
became unable to communicate his or her wishes. 
Instructions that can be included in this document 
vary from state to state. A living will generally allows 
a person to refuse only medical care that “merely 
prolongs the process of dying,” such as resuscitating 
a person with a terminal illness.
If a person has established a durable power of 
attorney for health care, the document would 
authorize someone else to make medical decisions 
for that person in any situation in which the person 
could no longer make them for him- or herself. 
This authorized person is called a health care 
surrogate or proxy. This surrogate, with the 
information given by the person’s health care 
provider, may consent to or refuse medical 
treatment on the person’s behalf. 
Do Not Resuscitate or Do Not 
Attempt Resuscitation
A doctor could formalize the person’s preferences 
by writing Do Not Resuscitate (DNR) or Do Not 
Attempt Resuscitation (DNAR) orders in his or her 
medical records. Such orders would state that if the 
person’s heart or breathing stops, he or she should 
not be resuscitated. DNR/DNAR orders may be 
covered in a living will or in the durable power of 
attorney for health care.
ADVANCE DIRECTIVES
(Continued )
 

--- Page 50 ---
38  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
CPR for a Child
If during the unconscious check you ﬁ nd that the child 
is not breathing, place the child face-up on a ﬁ rm, ﬂ at 
surface. Begin CPR by following these steps:
 ■ Locate the proper hand position on the middle 
of the breastbone as you would for an adult 
(Fig. 2-12, A). If you feel the notch at the end of 
the sternum, move your hands slightly toward the 
child’s head. 
 ■ Position your body as you would for an adult, 
kneeling next to the child’s upper chest, positioning 
FOCUS ON PREPAREDNESS (Continued )
Appointing someone to act as a health care 
surrogate, along with writing down your instructions, 
is the best way to formalize your wishes about 
medical care. Some of these documents can be 
obtained through a personal physician, attorney or 
various state and health care organizations. A lawyer 
is not always needed to execute advance directives. 
However, if you have any questions concerning 
advance directives, it is wise to obtain legal advice.
Talk in Advance
Copies of advance directives should be provided 
to all personal physicians, family members and the 
person chosen as the health care surrogate. Tell 
them which documents have been prepared and 
where the original and other copies are located. 
Discuss the document with all parties so that they 
understand the intent of all requests. Keep these 
documents updated.
Keep in mind that advance directives are not limited 
to elderly people or people with terminal illnesses. 
Advance directives should be considered by anyone 
who has decided on the care he or she would like to 
have provided. An unexpected injury or illness could 
create a need for decisions at any time.
Knowing about living wills, durable powers of 
attorney for health care and DNR/DNAR orders 
can help you prepare for difﬁ cult decisions. For 
more information about your rights and the options 
available to you in your state, contact a legal 
professional.
your shoulders over your hands and keeping your 
arms and elbows as straight as possible.
 ■ Give 30 chest compressions. Push hard, push fast 
to a depth of about 2 inches and at a rate of at least 
100 compressions per minute. Lift up, allowing the 
chest to fully return to its normal position, but keep 
contact with the chest. 
 ■ After giving 30 chest compressions, open the airway 
and give 2 rescue breaths (Fig. 2-12, B). Each rescue 
breath should last about 1 second and make the chest 
clearly rise. Use the head-tilt/chin-lift technique to 
ensure that the child’s airway is open. 
FIGURE 2-12, A–B To perform CPR on a child: A , Locate the proper hand position in the center of the child’s chest by placing 2 hands on the center 
of the child’s chest. B, After giving 30 chest compressions, open the airway and give 2 rescue breaths.
BA
 

--- Page 51 ---
  CHAPTER  2    |    Cardiac Emergencies and CPR 39
Continue cycles of 30 chest compressions and 2 rescue 
breaths. Do not stop CPR except in one of these 
situations:
 ■ You ﬁ nd an obvious sign of life, such as 
breathing.
 ■ An AED is ready to use.
 ■ Another trained responder or EMS personnel 
take over. 
 ■ You are too exhausted to continue.
 ■ The scene becomes unsafe.
If at any time you notice the child begin to breathe, 
stop CPR, keep the airway open and monitor breathing 
and for any changes in the child’s condition until EMS 
personnel take over.
CPR for an Infant
If during your check you ﬁ nd that the infant is not 
breathing, begin CPR by following these steps:
 ■ Find the correct location for compressions. 
Keep one hand on the infant’s forehead to 
maintain an open airway. Use the pads of two 
or three ﬁ ngers of your other hand to give chest 
compressions on the center of the chest, just 
below the nipple line (toward the infant’s feet). 
If you feel the notch at the end of the infant’s 
sternum, move your ﬁ ngers slightly toward the 
infant’s head.
 ■ Give 30 chest compressions using the pads of 
these ﬁ  ngers to compress the chest. Compress 
the chest about 1½ inches. Push hard, push fast 
(Fig. 2-13, A). Your compressions should be 
smooth, not jerky. Keep a steady rhythm. 
Do not pause between each compression. 
When your ﬁ  ngers are coming up, release pressure 
on the infant’s chest completely but do not let your 
ﬁ  ngers lose contact with the chest. Compress at a rate 
of at least 100 compressions per minute.
 ■ After giving 30 chest compressions, give 2 rescue 
breaths, covering the infant’s mouth and nose 
with your mouth (Fig. 2-13, B). Each rescue 
breath should last about 1 second and make the 
chest clearly rise. 
Continue cycles of 30 chest compressions and 2 
rescue breaths. Do not stop CPR except in one of these 
situations:
 ■ You ﬁ nd an obvious sign of life, such as 
breathing.
 ■ An AED is ready to use.
 ■ Another trained responder or EMS personnel take 
over. 
 ■ You are too exhausted to continue.
 ■ The scene becomes unsafe.
If at any time you notice the infant begin to breathe, 
stop CPR, keep the airway open and monitor breathing 
and for any changes in the infant’s condition until EMS 
personnel take over.
FIGURE 2-13, A–B To perform CPR on an infant: A , Place the pads of two or three ﬁ  ngers in the center of the infant’s chest and compress the chest 
about 1½ inches. B, Give 2 rescue breaths, covering the infant’s mouth and nose with your mouth.
A
 B
 

--- Page 52 ---
40  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
If Chest Does Not Rise
with Rescue Breaths
If the chest does not rise with the initial rescue breath, 
retilt the head before giving the second breath. If the 
second breath does not make the chest rise, the person 
may be choking. After each subsequent set of chest 
compressions and before attempting breaths, look 
for an object (Fig 2-14, A-B) and, if seen, remove it. 
Continue CPR.
Continuous Chest Compressions 
(Hands-Only CPR)
If you are unable or unwilling for any reason to perform 
full CPR (with rescue breaths), give continuous chest 
compressions after checking the scene and the person 
and calling 9-1-1 or the local emergency number 
(Fig 2-15, A-B). Continue giving chest compressions 
until EMS personnel take over or you notice an obvious 
sign of life, such as breathing. 
FIGURE 2-14, A–B After each subsequent set of chest compressions 
and before attempting breaths, look for an object and, if seen, remove 
it. Note: Do not attempt to remove an object if you do not see one.
A , Adult. B, Infant. FIGURE 2-15, A–B A , Check the person. B, Give chest compressions.
A
A
B
B
 

--- Page 53 ---
  CHAPTER  2    |    Cardiac Emergencies and CPR 41
PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER
Cardiac emergencies are life threatening. Every day 
someone will have a heart attack or go into cardiac 
arrest. These cardiac emergencies usually happen 
in the home. If you know the signals of a heart 
attack and cardiac arrest, you will be able to respond 
immediately. Call 9-1-1 or the local emergency 
number and give care until help takes over. If the 
person is in cardiac arrest, perform CPR. Use an 
AED if one is available. These steps will increase 
the chances of survival for the person having 
a cardiac emergency. 
Skill Components Adult Child Infant
HAND POSITION Two hands in center 
of chest (on lower half of 
sternum)
Two hands in center 
of chest (on lower half of 
sternum)
Two or three ﬁ ngers 
in center of chest 
(on lower half of 
sternum, just below 
nipple line)
CHEST COMPRESSIONS
RESCUE BREATHS
At least 2 inches
Until the chest clearly 
rises (about 1 second per 
breath)
About 2 inches
Until the chest clearly 
rises (about 1 second per 
breath)
About 1
1⁄2 inches 
Until the chest clearly 
rises (about 1 second per 
breath)
CYCLE 30 chest compressions 
and 2 rescue breaths
30 chest compressions 
and 2 rescue breaths
30 chest compressions 
and 2 rescue breaths
RATE 30 chest compressions in 
about 18 seconds 
(at least 100 
compressions 
per minute)
30 chest compressions in 
about 18 seconds 
(at least 100 
compressions 
per minute)
30 chest compressions in 
about 18 seconds 
(at least 100 
compressions 
per minute)
TABLE 2-1 CPR SKILL COMPARISON
 

--- Page 54 ---
42  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
AFTER CHECKING THE SCENE AND THE INJURED OR ILL PERSON: 
  GIVE 30 CHEST COMPRESSIONS 
Push hard, push fast in the center of the chest at 
least 2 inches deep and at least 100 compressions 
per minute.
  GIVE 2 RESCUE BREATHS 
 ■Tilt the head back and lift the chin up.
 ■Pinch the nose shut then make a 
complete seal over the person’s mouth.
 ■Blow in for about 1 second to make the 
chest clearly rise.
 ■Give rescue breaths, one after the other.
 ■If chest does not rise with the initial rescue breath, 
retilt the head before giving the second breath. 
If the second breath does not make the chest rise, the 
person may be choking. After each subsequent set of 
chest compressions and before attempting breaths, look for an object and, if seen, remove it. 
Continue CPR. 
  DO NOT STOP  
 Continue cycles of CPR. Do not stop except in one of these situations:
 ■You ﬁ  nd an obvious sign of life, such as breathing.
 ■An AED is ready to use.
 ■Another trained responder or EMS personnel take over. 
 ■You are too exhausted to continue.
 ■The scene becomes unsafe.
TIP: If at any time you notice an obvious sign of life, stop 
CPR and monitor breathing and for any changes in condition.
  WHAT TO DO NEXT
 ■USE AN AED AS SOON AS ONE IS AVAILABLE.
CPR—ADULT
NO BREATHING
TIP: The person must be on a ﬁ rm, ﬂ  at surface. 
SKILL SHEET
 

--- Page 55 ---
  CHAPTER  2    |    Cardiac Emergencies and CPR 43
SKILL SHEET
AFTER CHECKING THE SCENE AND THE INJURED OR ILL CHILD: 
  GIVE 30 CHEST COMPRESSIONS 
Push hard, push fast in the center of the chest about 
2 inches deep and at least 100 compressions per minute.
  GIVE 2 RESCUE BREATHS 
 ■Tilt the head back and lift the chin up.
 ■Pinch the nose shut then make a complete 
seal over the child’s mouth.
 ■Blow in for about 1 second to make the
chest clearly rise.
 ■Give rescue breaths, one after the other.
 ■If chest does not rise with the initial rescue breath, 
retilt the head before giving the second breath. 
If the second breath does not make the chest rise, the 
child may be choking. After each subsequent set of 
chest compressions and before attempting breaths, look for an object and, if seen, remove it. 
Continue CPR. 
  DO NOT STOP
Continue cycles of CPR. Do not stop except in one of these situations:
 ■You ﬁ  nd an obvious sign of life, such as breathing.
 ■An AED is ready to use.
 ■Another trained responder or EMS personnel take over. 
 ■You are too exhausted to continue.
 ■The scene becomes unsafe.
  WHAT TO DO NEXT
 ■USE AN AED AS SOON AS ONE IS AVAILABLE.
CPR—CHILD
NO BREATHING
TIP: The child must be on a ﬁ rm, ﬂ  at surface. 
TIP: If at any time you notice an obvious sign of life, stop 
CPR and monitor breathing and for any changes in condition.
 

--- Page 56 ---
44  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
AFTER CHECKING THE SCENE AND THE INJURED OR ILL INFANT: 
  GIVE 30 CHEST COMPRESSIONS 
Push hard, push fast in the center of the chest about 
1½ inches deep and at least 100 compressions 
per minute.
  GIVE 2 RESCUE BREATHS 
 ■Tilt the head back and lift the chin up to a 
neutral position.
 ■Make a complete seal over the infant’s
mouth and nose.
 ■Blow in for about 1 second to make the 
chest clearly rise.
 ■Give rescue breaths, one after the other.
 ■If chest does not rise with the initial rescue breath, 
retilt the head before giving the second breath. 
If the second breath does not make the chest rise, the 
infant may be choking. After each subsequent set of chest compressions and before attempting 
breaths, look for an object and, if seen, remove it. Continue CPR. 
  DO NOT STOP
Continue cycles of CPR. Do not stop except in one of these situations:
 ■You ﬁ  nd an obvious sign of life, such as breathing.
 ■An AED is ready to use.
 ■Another trained responder or EMS personnel take over. 
 ■You are too exhausted to continue.
 ■The scene becomes unsafe.
  WHAT TO DO NEXT
 ■USE AN AED AS SOON AS ONE IS AVAILABLE.
CPR—INFANT
NO BREATHING
SKILL SHEET
TIP: The infant must be on a ﬁ rm, ﬂ  at surface. 
TIP: If at any time you notice an obvious sign of life, stop 
CPR and monitor breathing and for any changes in condition.
 

--- Page 57 ---
  CHAPTER  3    |    AED 45
AED
CHAPTER   3
S
udden cardiac arrest occurs when the heart suddenly stops beating normally because of abnormal electrical 
activity of the heart. Every year in the United States more than 300,000 people die of sudden cardiac arrest. 
Sudden cardiac arrest can happen to anyone, anytime without warning but usually occurs in adults. Most 
cardiac arrests happen in the home. Therefore, knowing how to activate the emergency medical services (EMS) 
system, perform CPR and use an automated external deﬁ  brillator (AED) could help you save a life—most likely 
someone you love. 
This chapter further discusses the third link in the Cardiac Chain of Survival: early deﬁ  brillation, including what 
it is and how it works in the case of life-threatening abnormal electrical activity of the heart. You also will read 
about the steps to follow when using an AED. This knowledge will give you the conﬁ  dence to give care to anyone 
who experiences sudden cardiac arrest. 
 

--- Page 58 ---
46  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
WHEN THE HEART 
SUDDENL Y FAILS 
The heart’s electrical system sends out signals that tell 
the heart to pump blood. These signals travel through 
the upper chambers of the heart, called the atria, to the 
lower chambers, called the ventricles.
When the heart is normal and healthy, these electrical 
signals cause the ventricles to squeeze together, or 
contract. These contractions force blood out of the heart. 
The blood then circulates throughout the body. When 
the ventricles relax between contractions, blood ﬂ ows 
back into the heart. The pause that you notice between 
heart beats when taking a person’s pulse are the pauses 
between contractions.
If the heart is damaged by disease or injury, its electrical 
system can be disrupted. This can cause an abnormal 
heart rhythm that can stop the blood from circulating. 
The most common abnormal heart rhythm that causes 
sudden cardiac arrest occurs when the ventricles simply 
quiver, or ﬁ brillate, without any organized rhythm. 
This condition is called ventricular ﬁ brillation (V-ﬁ b). 
In V-ﬁ  b, the electrical impulses ﬁ re at random, creating 
chaos and preventing the heart from pumping and 
circulating blood. The person may suddenly collapse 
unconscious, and stop breathing.
Another abnormal rhythm found during sudden 
cardiac arrest is ventricular tachycardia, or V-tach. 
With V-tach, the electrical system tells the ventricles 
to contract too quickly. As a result, the heart cannot 
pump blood properly. As with V-ﬁ b, during V-tach 
the person may collapse, become unconscious and 
stop breathing.
In many cases, V-ﬁ  b and V-tach can be corrected by 
an electrical shock delivered by an AED. AEDs are 
portable electronic devices that analyze the heart’s 
rhythm and deliver an electrical shock, known as 
deﬁ brillation, which helps the heart to re-establish 
an effective rhythm (Fig. 3-1). For each minute that 
CPR and deﬁ  brillation are delayed, the person’s 
chance for survival is reduced by about 10 percent. 
However, by learning how to perform CPR and use 
an AED, you can make a difference before EMS 
personnel take over.
USING AN AED
When a cardiac arrest in an adult occurs, call 9-1-1 or 
local emergency number and begin CPR immediately. 
Also, use an AED as soon as it is available and ready to 
use (Fig. 3-2). If CPR is in progress, do not interrupt 
until the AED is turned on and the deﬁ brillation pads 
are applied. Always follow local protocols, which are 
guidelines provided by the facility’s medical director 
or EMS system, when using an AED. Be thoroughly 
familiar with the manufacturer’s operating instructions. 
Also, be familiar with maintenance guidelines for the 
device that you will be using. 
AED PRECAUTIONS 
When operating an AED, follow these general 
precautions:
 ■ Do not use alcohol to wipe the person’s chest dry. 
Alcohol is ﬂ ammable.
 ■ Do not use an AED and/or pads designed for adults 
on a child younger than 8 years or weighing less than 
55 pounds unless pediatric AED pads speciﬁ c to the 
device are not available. 
 ■ Do not use pediatric AED pads on an adult or on a 
child older than 8 years, or on a person weighing 
more than 55 pounds. AEDs equipped with 
pediatric AED pads deliver lower levels of energy 
that are considered appropriate only for children 
FIGURE 3-1 There are several types of AEDs.
FIGURE 3-2 Deﬁ brillation may help the heart to re-establish an 
effective heart rhythm.
 

--- Page 59 ---
  CHAPTER  3    |    AED 47
and infants up to 8 years old or weighing less than 
55 pounds.
 ■ Do not touch the person while the AED is 
analyzing. Touching or moving the person may 
affect analysis.
 ■ Before shocking a person with an AED, make sure 
that no one is touching or is in contact with the person 
or any resuscitation equipment. 
 ■ Do not touch the person while the device is 
deﬁ  brillating. You or someone else could be shocked.
 ■ Do not deﬁ brillate someone when around 
ﬂ ammable or combustible materials, such as gasoline 
or free-ﬂ owing oxygen.
 ■ Do not use an AED in a moving vehicle. Movement 
may affect the analysis. 
 ■ The person should not be in a pool or puddle of water 
when the responder is operating an AED. 
 ■ Do not use an AED on a person wearing a 
nitroglycerin patch or other medical patch on the 
chest. With a gloved hand, remove any patches from 
the chest before attaching the device. 
 ■ Do not use a mobile phone or radio within 6 feet 
of the AED. Radiofrequency interference (RFI) 
and electromagnetic interference (EMI), as well as 
infrared interference, generated by radio signals can 
disrupt analysis.
HOW TO USE AN 
AED—ADULTS
Different types of AEDs are available, but all are 
similar to operate and have some common features, 
such as electrode (AED or defibrillation) pads, voice 
prompts, visual displays and/or lighted buttons to 
guide the responder through the steps of the AED 
operation. Most AEDs can be operated by following 
these simple steps:
 ■ Turn on the AED. 
 ■ Expose the person’s chest and wipe the bare chest 
dry with a small towel or gauze pads. This ensures 
that the AED pads will stick to the chest properly. 
 ■ Apply the AED pads to the person’s bare, dry chest. 
(Make sure to peel the backing off each pad, one at a 
time, to expose the adhesive surface of the pad before 
applying it to  the person’s bare chest.) Place one pad 
on the upper right chest and the other pad on the left 
side of the chest (Fig. 3-3, A). 
 ■ Plug the connector into the AED, if necessary.
 ■ Let the AED analyze the heart rhythm (or push the 
button marked “analyze,” if indicated and prompted 
by the AED). Advise all responders and bystanders to 
“stand clear” (Fig. 3-3, B). No one should touch the 
person while the AED is analyzing because this could 
result in faulty readings. 
 ■ If the AED advises that a shock is needed:
 { Make sure that no one, including you, is touching 
the person.
 { Say, “EVERYONE, STAND CLEAR.”
 { Deliver the shock by pushing the “shock” button, 
if necessary. (Some models can deliver the 
shock automatically while others have a “shock” 
button that must be manually pushed to deliver 
the shock.)
 ■ After delivering the shock, or if no shock is advised:
 { Perform about 2 minutes (or 5 cycles) of CPR. 
 { Continue to follow the prompts of the AED.
If at any time you notice an obvious sign of life, such as 
breathing, stop performing CPR and monitor the person’s 
breathing and any changes in the person’s condition. 
FIGURE 3-3, A–B To use an AED on an adult: Turn on the AED. A, Apply the pads to the person’s bare, dry chest. Place one pad on the upper right 
chest and the other pad on the left side of the chest. B, Advise everyone to “stand clear” while the AED analyzes the heart rhythm. Deliver a shock by 
pushing the shock button if indicated and prompted by the AED.
A B
 

--- Page 60 ---
48  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
HOW TO USE AN AED—
CHILDREN AND INFANTS
While the incidence of cardiac arrest is relatively 
low compared with adults, sudden cardiac arrest 
resulting from V-ﬁ  b does happen to young children 
and infants. However, most cases of cardiac arrest 
in children and infants are not sudden and may be 
caused by:
 ■ Airway and breathing problems. 
 ■ Traumatic injuries or accidents (e.g., motor-vehicle 
collision, drowning, electrocution or poisoning).
 ■ A hard blow to the chest.
 ■ Congenital heart disease.
 ■ Sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS).
Use an AED as soon as it is available, ready to use and 
is safe to do so. However, as you learned in the Cardiac 
Chain of Survival, in a cardiac emergency, you should 
always call 9-1-1 or the local emergency number ﬁ rst. 
AEDs equipped with pediatric AED pads can deliver 
lower levels of energy considered appropriate for 
children and infants up to 8 years of age or weighing 
less than 55 pounds. Use pediatric AED pads and/or 
equipment if available. If pediatric-speciﬁ c equipment 
is not available, use an AED designed for adults on 
children and infants. Always follow local protocols (i.e., 
guidelines provided by the facility’s medical director 
or EMS) and the manufacturer’s instructions. Follow 
the same general steps and precautions that you would 
when using an AED on an adult in cardiac arrest. 
 ■ Turn on the AED.
 ■ Expose the child’s or infant’s chest and wipe it dry. 
 ■ Apply the pediatric pads to the child’s or infant’s bare, 
dry chest. Place one pad on the child’s upper right 
chest and the other pad on the left side of the chest. 
Make sure that the pads are not touching. If the 
pads risk touching each other, such as with a small 
child or an infant, place one pad in the middle of 
the child’s or infant’s chest and the other pad on 
the child’s or infant’s back, between the shoulder 
blades (Fig. 3-4, A–B). 
 ■ Plug the connector into the AED, if necessary.
 ■ Let the AED analyze the heart rhythm (or push the 
button marked “analyze,” if indicated and prompted 
by the AED). Advise all responders and bystanders to 
“Stand clear.” No one should touch the child or infant 
while the AED is analyzing because this could result 
in faulty reading. 
 ■ If the AED advises that a shock is needed:
 { Make sure that no one, including you, is touching 
the child or infant.
 { Say, “EVERYONE, STAND CLEAR.”
 { Deliver the shock by pushing the “shock” button, 
if necessary.
 ■ After delivering the shock, or if no shock is advised:
 { Perform about 2 minutes (or 5 cycles) of CPR. 
 { Continue to follow the prompts of the AED.
If at any time you notice an obvious sign of life, 
such as breathing, stop performing CPR and monitor 
breathing and for any changes in the child’s or 
infant’s condition.
SPECIAL AED SITUATIONS
Some situations require you to pay special attention 
when using an AED. These include using AEDs 
around water and on people with implantable devices, 
transdermal patches, hypothermia, trauma and jewelry 
or body piercings. Or, you may need to determine what 
FIGURE 3-4, A–B A, Place one pediatric pad on the upper right chest and the other pad on the left side of the chest. B, If the pads risk touching 
each other, place one on the chest and the other on the back of the child or infant.
A B
 

--- Page 61 ---
  CHAPTER  3    |    AED 49
to do if local protocols or the AED’s instructions differ 
from those you have learned. Familiarize yourself with 
these situations as much as possible so that you know 
how to respond appropriately, should the situation arise. 
Always use common sense when using an AED and 
follow the manufacturer’s recommendations.
AEDs Around Water 
If the person is in water, remove him or her from the 
water before deﬁ brillation. A shock delivered in water 
could harm responders or bystanders. Once you have 
removed the person from the water, be sure there are 
no puddles of water around you, the person or the 
AED. Remove wet clothing to place the pads properly, 
if necessary. Dry the person’s chest and attach the 
AED pads. 
If it is raining, take steps to make sure that the person 
is as dry as possible and sheltered from the rain. 
Ensure that the person’s chest is wiped dry. Do not 
delay deﬁ brillation when taking steps to create a dry 
environment. AEDs are safe when all precautions and 
manufacturer’s operating instructions are followed, even 
in rain and snow. Avoid getting the AED or deﬁ brillation 
pads wet.
Pacemakers and Implantable 
 Cardioverter-Deﬁ brillators
Some people whose hearts are weak, beat too slowly, 
skip beats or beat in a rhythm that is too fast may have 
had a pacemaker implanted. These small, implantable 
devices are usually located in the area below the person’s 
left collar bone, although they can be placed elsewhere. 
Typically they feel like a small lump under the skin. 
Other people may have an implantable cardio verter-
deﬁ brillator (ICD), a miniature version of an AED. ICDs 
automatically recognize and restore abnormal heart 
rhythms. Sometimes a person’s heart beats irregularly, 
even if the person has a pacemaker or ICD. 
If the implanted device is visible or you know that the 
person has one, do not place the deﬁ brillation pads 
directly over the device (Fig. 3-5). This may interfere 
with the delivery of the shock. Adjust pad placement if 
necessary and continue to follow the AED instructions. 
If you are not sure whether the person has an implanted 
device, use the AED if needed. It will not harm the 
person or responder. 
The responder should be aware that it is possible to 
receive a mild shock if an implantable ICD delivers a 
shock to the person during CPR. However, this risk 
of injury to responders is minimal, and the amount of 
electrical energy involved is low. Follow any special 
precautions associated with ICDs but do not delay in 
performing CPR and using an AED. 
Transdermal Medication Patches
Some people have a patch on their skin that 
automatically delivers medication through the skin, 
called a transdermal medication patch. A common 
medication patch is the nitroglycerin patch, which 
is used by people with a history of cardiac problems. 
Because a responder can absorb medication through 
the skin, remove patches with a gloved hand before 
deﬁ brillation. Nicotine patches used to stop smoking 
look similar to nitroglycerin patches. Do not waste time 
trying to identify patches. Instead remove any patch 
that you see on the person’s chest with a gloved hand. 
Never place AED electrode pads directly on top of 
medication patches. 
Hypothermia 
Hypothermia is a life-threatening condition in which the 
entire body cools because its ability to keep warm fails. 
Some people who have experienced hypothermia have 
been resuscitated successfully, even after prolonged 
exposure to the cold. If the person is not breathing, 
begin CPR until an AED becomes readily available. 
Follow local protocols as to whether you should use 
an AED in this situation. 
If the person is wet, remove wet clothing and dry his or 
her chest. Attach the AED pads. If a shock is indicated, 
deliver it, following the instructions of the AED. 
If the person still is not breathing, continue CPR and 
protect the person from further heat loss. Follow local 
protocols as to whether additional shocks should 
be delivered. Do not withhold CPR or deﬁ brillation 
to re-warm the person. Be careful not to unnecessarily 
shake a person who has experienced hypothermia as 
this could result in V-ﬁ b.
Trauma 
If a person is in cardiac arrest as a result of traumatic 
injuries, you still can use an AED. Administer 
deﬁ brillation according to local protocols. 
FIGURE 3-5 Look for an ICD before deﬁ brillation. Courtesy of Ted Crites.
 

--- Page 62 ---
50  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
Chest Hair
Some men have excessive chest hair that may interfere 
with AED pad-to-skin contact, although it’s a rare 
occurrence. Since time is critical in a cardiac arrest 
situation and chest hair rarely interferes with pad 
adhesion, attach the pads and analyze the heart’s 
rhythm as soon as possible. Press ﬁ rmly on the pads to 
attach them to the person’s chest. 
If you get a “check pads” or similar message from the 
AED, remove the pads and replace them with new ones. 
The pad adhesive may pull out some of the chest hair, 
which may solve the problem. If you continue to get 
the “check pads” message, remove the pads, shave the 
person’s chest where the pads should be placed, and 
attach new pads to the person’s chest. (There should 
be spare deﬁ brillation pads and a safety razor included 
in the AED kit.) Be careful not to cut the person while 
shaving the chest, as cuts and scrapes can interfere 
with rhythm analysis. 
Metal Surfaces 
It is safe to deliver a shock to a person in cardiac arrest 
when he or she is lying on a metal surface, such as 
bleachers, as long as appropriate safety precautions 
are taken. Speciﬁ cally, care should be taken that 
deﬁ brillation electrode pads do not contact the 
conductive (metal) surface and that no one is touching 
the person when the shock button is pressed.
Jewelry and Body Piercings
You do not need to remove jewelry and body piercings 
when using an AED. Leaving them on the person will 
do no harm. Taking time to remove them will delay 
giving the ﬁ  rst shock. Therefore, do not delay the 
use of an AED to remove jewelry or body piercings. 
However, do not place the AED pads directly over 
metallic jewelry or body piercings. Adjust AED pad 
placement if necessary. 
OTHER AED PROTOCOLS 
Other AED protocols, such as delivering three shocks 
and then performing CPR, are neither wrong nor 
harmful to the person. However, improved methods, 
based on scientiﬁ c evidence, make it easier to coordinate 
performing CPR and using the AED. Follow the 
instructions of the AED device you are using. 
AED MAINTENANCE
For deﬁ  brillators to perform properly, they must be 
maintained like any other machine. AEDs require 
minimal maintenance. They have a variety of self-
testing features. However, it is important to be 
familiar with any visual or audible warning prompts 
on the AED that warn of malfunction or a low 
battery. Read the operator’s manual thoroughly and 
check with the manufacturer to obtain all necessary 
information regarding maintenance.
In most cases, if the machine detects any malfunction, 
contact the manufacturer. You may need to return 
the device to the manufacturer for service. Although 
AEDs require minimal maintenance, it is important to 
remember the following:
 ■ Follow the manufacturer’s speciﬁ c recommendations 
and your facility’s schedule for periodic equipment 
checks, including checking the batteries and 
deﬁ brillation pads.
 ■ Make sure that the batteries have enough energy for 
one complete rescue. (A fully charged backup battery 
should be readily available.)
 ■ Make sure that the correct deﬁ brillation pads are in 
the package and are properly sealed.
 ■ Check any expiration dates on deﬁ brillation pads and 
batteries and replace as needed.
 ■ After use, make sure that all accessories are replaced 
and that the machine is in proper working order.
 ■ If at any time the machine fails to work properly 
or warning indicators are recognized, stop using it 
and contact the manufacturer immediately. If the 
AED stops working during an emergency continue 
performing CPR until EMS personnel take over.
PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER
Sudden cardiac arrest is a life-threatening emergency 
that happens when the heart suddenly stops beating or 
circulating blood because of abnormal electrical activity 
of the heart. You must act quickly to help. For a person 
to survive cardiac arrest, responders must recognize 
the cardiac emergency, call 9-1-1 immediately, perform 
CPR and use an AED as soon as one becomes available. 
These actions will keep blood containing oxygen ﬂ owing 
throughout the body, stop the abnormal heart rhythm 
and ensure that advanced medical care arrives as quickly 
as possible. The sooner the EMS system is activated, 
CPR is started and a deﬁ brillation shock from an AED 
is delivered, the greater are the chances for survival. By 
following the four links of the Cardiac Chain of Survival 
you can help save a life. 
 

--- Page 63 ---
  CHAPTER  3    |    AED 51
SKILL SHEET
AED—ADULT OR CHILD
OLDER THAN 8 YEARS OR WEIGHING MORE THAN 55 POUNDS
NO BREATHING 
AFTER CHECKING THE SCENE AND THE INJURED OR ILL PE RSON:
  TURN ON AED 
Follow the voice and/or visual prompts. 
  WIPE BARE CHEST DRY 
  ATTACH PADS 
  PLUG IN CONNECTOR, 
 IF NECESSARY
TIP: Do not use pediatric AED pads or equipment on an adult or 
on a child older than 8 years or weighing more than 55 pounds. 
TIP: Remove any medication patches with a gloved hand.
Continued on next page
 

--- Page 64 ---
52  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
SKILL SHEET continued
  STAND CLEAR 
Make sure no one, including you, is touching the person. 
 ■Say, “EVERYONE STAND CLEAR. ”
  ANALYZE HEART RHYTHM  
Push the “analyze” button, if necessary. Let the AED analyze the heart rhythm.
  DELIVER SHOCK 
IF A SHOCK IS ADVISED:
 ■Make sure no one, including you, is touching the person.
 ■Say, “EVERYONE STAND CLEAR. ”
 ■Push the “shock” button, if necessary.
  PERFORM CPR  
After delivering the shock, or if no shock is advised:
 ■Perform about 2 minutes (or 5 cycles) of CPR. 
 ■Continue to follow the prompts of the AED.
TIPS: 
 If at any time you notice an obvious sign of life, stop CPR 
 and monitor breathing and for any changes in condition. 
 If two trained responders are present, one should perform 
 CPR while the second responder operates the AED. 
 

--- Page 65 ---
  CHAPTER  3    |    AED 53
AED—CHILD AND INFANT
YOUNGER THAN 8 YEARS OR WEIGHING LESS THAN 55 POUNDS 
NO BREATHING 
SKILL SHEET
AFTER CHECKING THE SCENE AND THE INJURED OR ILL CHILD OR INF ANT:
  TURN ON AED 
Follow the voice and/or visual prompts. 
  WIPE BARE CHEST DRY  
  ATTACH PADS 
If the pads risk touching each other, use the 
front-to-back pad placement. 
  PLUG IN CONNECTOR, 
 IF NECESSARY 
TIP: When available, use pediatric settings or pads when caring for children and infants. 
If pediatric equipment is not available, rescuers may use AEDs conﬁ  gured for adults. 
Continued on next page
 

--- Page 66 ---
54  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
  STAND CLEAR 
Make sure no one, including you, is touching 
the child or infant. 
 ■Say, “EVERYONE STAND CLEAR. ”
  ANALYZE HEART RHYTHM  
Push the “analyze” button, if necessary. Let the AED analyze the heart rhythm.
  DELIVER SHOCK 
IF A SHOCK IS ADVISED:
 ■Make sure no one, including you, 
is touching the child or infant.
 ■Say, “EVERYONE STAND CLEAR. ”
 ■Push the “shock” button. 
  PERFORM CPR  
After delivering the shock, or if no shock is advised:
 ■Perform about 2 minutes (or 5 cycles) of CPR. 
 ■Continue to follow the prompts of the AED.
TIPS: 
 If at any time you notice an obvious sign of life, stop CPR 
 and monitor breathing and for any changes in condition. 
 If two trained responders are present, one should perform  
 CPR while the second responder operates the AED.
SKILL SHEET continued
 

--- Page 67 ---
  CHAPTER  4    |    Breathing Emergencies 55
Breathing Emergencies
CHAPTER   4
A 
breathing emergency is any respiratory problem that can threaten a person’s life. Breathing emergencies 
happen when air cannot travel freely and easily into the lungs. Respiratory distress, respiratory arrest and 
choking are examples of breathing emergencies. In a breathing emergency, seconds count so you must react 
at once. This chapter discusses how to recognize and care for breathing emergencies.
 

--- Page 68 ---
56  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
BACKGROUND 
The human body needs a constant supply of oxygen 
to survive. When you breathe through your mouth and 
nose, air travels down your throat, through 
your windpipe and into your lungs. This pathway 
from the mouth and nose to the lungs is called 
the airway. 
As you might imagine, the airway, mouth and nose are 
smaller in children and infants than they are in adults 
(Fig. 4-1, A–B).  As a result, they can be blocked more 
easily by small objects, blood, ﬂ  uids or swelling.
In a breathing emergency, air must reach the lungs. For 
any person, regardless of age, it is important to keep the 
airway open when giving care. 
Once air reaches the lungs, oxygen in the air is 
transferred to the blood. The heart pumps the blood 
throughout the body. The blood ﬂ ows through the blood 
vessels, delivering oxygen to the brain, heart and all 
other parts of the body.
In some breathing emergencies the oxygen supply to the 
body is greatly reduced, whereas in others the oxygen 
supply is cut off entirely. As a result, the heart soon stops 
beating and blood no longer moves through the body. 
Without oxygen, brain cells can begin to die within 4 to 
6 minutes (Fig. 4-2). Unless the brain receives oxygen 
within minutes, permanent brain damage or death 
will result.
It is important to recognize breathing emergencies 
in children and infants and act before the heart stops 
beating. Frequently, an adult’s heart stops working 
(known as cardiac arrest) because of heart disease. 
However, children and infants usually have healthy 
hearts. When the heart stops in a child or infant, it 
usually is the result of a breathing emergency. 
No matter what the age of the person, trouble breathing 
can be the ﬁ rst signal of a more serious emergency, 
such as a heart problem. Recognizing the signals of 
breathing problems and giving care often are the keys 
to preventing these problems from becoming more 
serious emergencies.
If the injured or ill person is conscious, he or she 
may be able to indicate what is wrong by speaking or 
gesturing to you and may be able to answer questions. 
However, if you are unable to communicate with a 
FIGURE 4-2 Time is critical in breathing emergencies.
Nose
Mouth
Tongue
Epiglottis
Trachea
FIGURE 4-1, B An adult’s airway
Nose
Mouth
Tongue
Epiglottis
Trachea
FIGURE 4-1, A A child’s airway
 

--- Page 69 ---
  CHAPTER  4    |    Breathing Emergencies 57
person, it can be difﬁ cult to determine what is wrong. 
Therefore, it is important to recognize the signals of 
breathing emergencies, know when to call 9-1-1 or the 
local emergency number and know what to do until help 
arrives and takes over. 
RESPIRATORY DISTRESS 
AND RESPIRATORY ARREST 
Respiratory distress and respiratory arrest are types 
of breathing emergencies. Respiratory distress is a 
condition in which breathing becomes difﬁ cult. It is 
the most common breathing emergency. Respiratory 
distress can lead to respiratory arrest, which occurs 
when breathing has stopped. 
Normal breathing is regular, quiet and effortless. A person 
does not appear to be working hard or struggling when 
breathing normally. This means that the person is not 
making noise when breathing, breaths are not fast and 
breathing does not cause discomfort or pain. However, it 
should be noted that normal breathing rates in children 
and infants are faster than normal breathing rates in 
adults. Infants have periodic breathing, so changes in 
breathing patterns are normal for infants.
You usually can identify a breathing problem by 
watching and listening to the person’s breathing and by 
asking the person how he or she feels.
Causes of Respiratory Distress 
and Respiratory Arrest
Respiratory distress and respiratory arrest can be caused by:
 ■ Choking (a partially or completely obstructed airway).
 ■ Illness.
 ■ Chronic conditions (long-lasting or frequently 
recurring), such as asthma.
 ■ Electrocution.
 ■ Irregular heartbeat.
 ■ Heart attack.
 ■ Injury to the head or brain stem, chest, lungs or 
abdomen.
 ■ Allergic reactions.
 ■ Drug overdose (especially alcohol, narcotic painkillers, 
barbiturates, anesthetics and other depressants).
 ■ Poisoning.
 ■ Emotional distress.
 ■ Drowning.
Asthma
Asthma is the inﬂ ammation of the air passages that 
results in a temporary narrowing of the airways that 
carry oxygen to the lungs. An asthma attack happens 
when a trigger, such as exercise, cold air, allergens or 
other irritants, causes the airway to swell and narrow. 
This makes breathing difﬁ cult.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
(CDC) estimate that in 2005, nearly 22.2 million 
Americans were affected by asthma. Asthma is more 
common in children and young adults than in older 
adults, but its frequency and severity is increasing 
in all age groups in the United States. Asthma is the 
third-ranking cause of hospitalization among those 
younger than 15 years. 
You often can tell when a person is having an asthma 
attack by the hoarse whistling sound that he or 
she makes while exhaling. This sound, known as 
wheezing, occurs because air becomes trapped in 
the lungs. Trouble breathing, shortness of breath, 
tightness in the chest and coughing after exercise are 
other signals of an asthma attack. Usually, people 
diagnosed with asthma prevent and control their 
attacks with medication. These medications reduce 
swelling and mucus production in the airways. They 
also relax the muscle bands that tighten around 
the airways, making breathing easier. For more 
information on asthma, see Chapter 10.
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease 
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a 
long-term lung disease encompassing both chronic 
bronchitis and emphysema. COPD causes a person 
to have trouble breathing because of damage to the 
lungs. In a person with COPD, the airways become 
partly blocked and the air sacs in the lungs lose their 
ability to ﬁ  ll with air. This makes it hard to breathe 
in and out. There is no cure for COPD, and it worsens 
over time.
The most common cause of COPD is cigarette 
smoking, but breathing in other types of lung 
irritants, pollution, dust or chemicals over a long 
period also can cause COPD. It usually is diagnosed 
when a person is middle aged or older. It is the 
fourth-ranking cause of death in the United States 
and a major cause of illness.
Common signals of COPD include: 
 ■ Coughing up a large volume of mucus.
 ■ Tendency to tire easily.
 ■ Loss of appetite.
 ■ Bent posture with shoulders raised and lips pursed to 
make breathing easier.
 ■ A fast pulse.
 ■ Round, barrel-shaped chest.
 ■ Confusion (caused by lack of oxygen to the brain). 
 

--- Page 70 ---
58  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
Emphysema
Emphysema is a type of COPD. Emphysema is a disease 
that involves damage to the air sacs in the lungs. It is a 
chronic (long-lasting or frequently recurring) disease 
that worsens over time. The most common signal of 
emphysema is shortness of breath. Exhaling is extremely 
difﬁ cult. In advanced cases, the affected person may 
feel restless, confused and weak, and even may go into 
respiratory or cardiac arrest. 
Bronchitis
Bronchitis is an inﬂ ammation of the main air passages 
to the lungs. It can be acute (short-lasting) or chronic. 
Chronic bronchitis is a type of COPD. To be diagnosed 
with chronic bronchitis, a person must have a cough 
with mucus on most days of the month for at least 
3 months. 
Acute bronchitis is not a type of COPD; it develops after 
a person has had a viral respiratory infection. It ﬁ rst 
affects the nose, sinuses and throat and then spreads to 
the lungs. Those most at risk for acute bronchitis include 
children, infants, the elderly, people with heart or lung 
disease and smokers.
Signals of both types of bronchitis include:
 ■ Chest discomfort.
 ■ Cough that produces mucus.
 ■ Fatigue.
 ■ Fever (usually low).
 ■ Shortness of breath that worsens with activity.
 ■ Wheezing.
Additional signals of chronic bronchitis include:
 ■ Ankle, feet and leg swelling.
 ■ Blue lips.
 ■ Frequent respiratory infections, such as colds or 
the ﬂ u.
Hyperventilation
Hyperventilation occurs when a person’s breathing 
is faster and more shallow than normal. When this 
happens, the body does not take in enough oxygen to 
meet its demands. People who are hyperventilating feel 
as if they cannot get enough air. Often they are afraid 
and anxious or seem confused. They may say that 
they feel dizzy or that their ﬁ ngers and toes feel numb 
and tingly.
Hyperventilation often results from fear or anxiety 
and usually occurs in people who are tense and 
nervous. However, it also can be caused by head 
injuries, severe bleeding or illnesses, such as high 
fever, heart failure, lung disease and diabetic 
emergencies. Asthma and exercise also can trigger 
hyperventilation.
Hyperventilation is the body’s way of compensating 
when there is a lack of enough oxygen. The result is 
a decrease in carbon dioxide, which alters the acidity of 
the blood.
Allergic Reactions
An allergic reaction is the response of the immune 
system to a foreign substance that enters the body. 
Common allergens include bee or insect venom, 
antibiotics, pollen, animal dander, sulfa and some 
foods such as nuts, peanuts, shellﬁ sh, strawberries and 
coconut oils. 
Allergic reactions can cause breathing problems. At ﬁ rst 
the reaction may appear to be just a rash and a feeling 
of tightness in the chest and throat, but this condition 
can become life threatening. The person’s face, neck and 
tongue may swell, closing the airway.
A severe allergic reaction can cause a condition called 
anaphylaxis, also known as anaphylactic shock. 
During anaphylaxis, air passages swell and restrict a 
person’s breathing. Anaphylaxis can be brought on 
when a person with an allergy comes into contact with 
allergens via insect stings, food, certain medications or 
other substances. Signals of anaphylaxis include a rash, 
tightness in the chest and throat, and swelling of the 
face, neck and tongue. The person also may feel dizzy or 
confused. Anaphylaxis is a life-threatening emergency. 
Some people know that they are allergic to certain 
substances or to insect stings. They may have learned to 
avoid these things and may carry medication to reverse 
the allergic reaction. People who have severe allergic 
reactions may wear a medical identiﬁ cation (ID) tag, 
bracelet or necklace.
Croup 
Croup is a harsh, repetitive cough that most commonly 
affects children younger than 5 years. The airway 
constricts, limiting the passage of air, which causes the 
child to produce an unusual-sounding cough that can 
range from a high-pitched wheeze to a barking cough. 
Croup mostly occurs during the evening and nighttime. 
Most children with croup can be cared for at home using 
mist treatment or cool air. However, in some cases, a 
child with croup can progress quickly from respiratory 
distress to respiratory arrest. 
Epiglottitis
Epiglottitis is a far less common infection than croup 
that causes severe swelling of the epiglottis. The 
epiglottis is a piece of cartilage at the back of the tongue. 
 

--- Page 71 ---
  CHAPTER  4    |    Breathing Emergencies 59
When it swells, it can block the windpipe and lead to 
severe breathing problems. Epiglottitis usually is caused 
by infection with Haemophilus inﬂ uenzae bacteria.
The signals of epiglottitis may be similar to croup, but 
it is a more serious illness and can result in death if the 
airway is blocked completely. 
In the past, epiglottitis was a common illness in children 
between 2 and 6 years of age. However, epiglottitis in 
children has dropped dramatically in the United States 
since the 1980s when children began routinely receiving 
the H. inﬂ  uenzae type B (Hib) vaccine.
For children and adults, epiglottitis begins with a high 
fever and sore throat. A person with epiglottitis may 
need to sit up and lean forward, perhaps with the chin 
thrust out in order to breathe. Other signals include 
drooling, difﬁ culty swallowing, voice changes, chills, 
shaking and fever.
Seek medical care immediately for a person who may 
have epiglottitis. This condition is a medical emergency. 
What to Look For
Although breathing problems have many causes, you 
do not need to know the exact cause of a breathing 
emergency to care for it. You do need to be able to 
recognize when a person is having trouble breathing or 
is not breathing at all. Signals of breathing emergencies 
include:
 ■ Trouble breathing or no breathing.
 ■ Slow or rapid breathing. 
 ■ Unusually deep or shallow breathing.
 ■ Gasping for breath.
 ■ Wheezing, gurgling or making high-pitched noises.
 ■ Unusually moist or cool skin.
 ■ Flushed, pale, ashen or bluish skin.
 ■ Shortness of breath.
 ■ Dizziness or light-headedness.
 ■ Pain in the chest or tingling in the hands, feet or lips.
 ■ Apprehensive or fearful feelings.
When to Call 9-1-1
If a person is not breathing or if breathing is too fast, too 
slow, noisy or painful, call 9-1-1 or the local emergency 
number immediately.
What to Do Until Help Arrives
If an adult, child or infant is having trouble breathing:
 ■ Help the person rest in a comfortable position. Usually, 
sitting is more comfortable than lying down because 
breathing is easier in that position (Fig. 4-3). 
 ■ If the person is conscious, check for other 
conditions. 
 ■ Remember that a person having breathing problems 
may ﬁ nd it hard to talk. If the person cannot talk, 
ask him or her to nod or to shake his or her head 
to answer yes-or-no questions. Try to reassure 
the person to reduce anxiety. This may make 
breathing easier. 
 ■ If bystanders are present and the person with 
trouble breathing is having difﬁ culty answering 
your questions, ask them what they know about the 
person’s condition.
 ■ If the person is hyperventilating and you are sure 
whether it is caused by emotion, such as excitement 
or fear, tell the person to relax and breathe slowly. 
A person who is hyperventilating from emotion may 
resume normal breathing if he or she is reassured 
and calmed down. If the person’s breathing still 
does not slow down, the person could have a serious 
problem.
If an adult is unconscious and not breathing, the 
cause is most likely a cardiac emergency. Immediately 
begin CPR starting with chest compressions. 
If an adult is not breathing because of a respiratory 
cause, such as drowning, or drug overdose, give 
2 rescue breaths after checking for breathing and 
before quickly scanning for severe bleeding and 
beginning CPR.
Remember, a nonbreathing person’s greatest need is for 
oxygen. If breathing stops or is restricted long enough, 
a person will become unconscious, the heart will stop 
beating and body systems will quickly fail.
If a child or an infant is unconscious and not breathing, 
give 2 rescue breaths after checking for breathing 
and before quickly scanning for severe bleeding and 
beginning CPR. 
FIGURE 4-3 A person who is having trouble breathing may breathe 
more easily in a sitting position.
 

--- Page 72 ---
60  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
CHOKING 
Choking is a common breathing emergency. It occurs 
when the person’s airway is partially or completely 
blocked. If a conscious person is choking, his or her airway 
has been blocked by a foreign object, such as a piece of 
food or a small toy; by swelling in the mouth or throat; or 
by ﬂ  uids, such as vomit or blood. With a partially blocked 
airway, the person usually can breathe with some trouble. 
A person with a partially blocked airway may be able to 
get enough air in and out of the lungs to cough or to make 
wheezing sounds. The person also may get enough air 
to speak. A person whose airway is completely blocked 
cannot cough, speak, cry or breathe at all.
Causes of Choking in Adults
Causes of choking in an adult include:
 ■ Trying to swallow large pieces of poorly chewed 
food.
 ■ Drinking alcohol before or during meals. (Alcohol 
dulls the nerves that aid swallowing.)
 ■ Wearing dentures. (Dentures make it difﬁ cult 
to sense whether food is fully chewed before it 
is swallowed.)
 ■ Eating while talking excitedly or laughing, or eating 
too fast.
 ■ Walking, playing or running with food or objects in 
the mouth.
Causes of Choking in Children 
and Infants 
Choking is a common cause of injury and death in 
children younger than 5 years. Because young children 
put nearly everything in their mouths, small, nonfood 
items, such as safety pins, small parts from toys and 
coins, often cause choking. However, food is responsible 
for most of the choking incidents in children.
The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) 
recommends that young children not be given hard, 
smooth foods such as raw vegetables. These foods 
must be chewed with a grinding motion, which is 
a skill that children do not master until 4 years of 
age; therefore, children may attempt to swallow 
these foods whole. For this same reason, the AAP 
recommends not giving children peanuts until they 
are 7 years of age or older.
The AAP also recommends that young children not be 
given round, ﬁ rm foods such as hot dogs and carrot 
sticks unless they are chopped into small pieces no 
larger than ½ inch. Since choking remains a signiﬁ cant 
danger to children younger than 5 years, the AAP further 
recommends keeping the following foods, and other 
items meant to be chewed or swallowed, away from 
young children:
 ■ Hard, gooey or sticky candy
 ■ Grapes 
 ■ Popcorn
FOCUS ON PREVENTION
CHOKING IN CHILDREN AND INFANTS
 ■ Supervise mealtimes for young children 
and infants.
 ■ Do not let children eat while playing or running.
 ■ Teach children to chew and swallow food 
before talking or laughing.
 ■ Do not give chewing gum to young children.
 ■ Do not give young children smooth, hard food 
such as peanuts and raw vegetables. 
 ■ Do not give young children round, ﬁ rm 
foods such as hot dogs and carrot sticks 
unless chopped into pieces ½ inch 
or smaller. 
 ■ Do not allow small children to play with 
un-inﬂ ated balloons. (The U.S. Consumer 
Product Safety Commission recommends 
keeping these away from children younger than 
8 years of age.)
 ■ Keep small objects such as safety pins, small 
parts from toys and coins away from small 
children.
 ■ Make sure that toys are too large to be 
swallowed.
 ■ Make sure that toys have no small parts that 
could be pulled off.
If you are unsure whether an object is safe for young 
children, test it by trying to pass it through a toilet 
paper roll. If it ﬁ ts through the 1¾-inch diameter roll, 
it is not safe for young children.
 

--- Page 73 ---
  CHAPTER  4    |    Breathing Emergencies 61
 ■ Chewing gum
 ■ Vitamins
Although food items cause most of the choking injuries 
in children, toys and household items also can be 
hazardous. Balloons, when broken or un-inﬂ ated, can 
choke or suffocate young children who try to swallow them. 
According to the Consumer Product Safety Commission 
(CPSC), more children have suffocated on non-inﬂ ated 
balloons and pieces of broken balloons than any other type 
of toy. Other nonfood items that can cause choking include:
 ■ Baby powder.
 ■ Objects from the trash, such as eggshells and pop-tops 
from beverage cans.
 ■ Safety pins.
 ■ Coins.
 ■ Marbles.
 ■ Pen and marker caps.
 ■ Small button-type batteries.
What to Look For
Signals of choking include:
 ■ Coughing, either forcefully or weakly.
 ■ Clutching the throat with one or both hands (Fig. 4-4).
 ■ Inability to cough, speak, cry or breathe.
 ■ Making high-pitched noises while inhaling or noisy 
breathing.
 ■ Panic.
 ■ Bluish skin color.
 ■ Losing consciousness if blockage is not removed.
When to Call 9-1-1
If the person continues to cough without coughing up the 
object, have someone call 9-1-1 or the local emergency 
number. A partially blocked airway can quickly become 
completely blocked. 
FIGURE 4-4 Clutching the throat with one or 
both hands is universally recognized as a signal 
for choking. 
FIGURE 4-5, A–B If a conscious adult has a completely blocked airway: A, Give back blows. B, Then give abdominal thrusts. 
A B
A person whose airway is completely blocked cannot 
cough, speak, cry or breathe. Sometimes the person may 
cough weakly or make high-pitched noises. This tells you 
that the person is not getting enough air to stay alive. 
Act at once! If a bystander is available, have him or her 
call 9-1-1 or the local emergency number while you begin 
to give care.
What to Do Until Help Arrives
Caring for a Conscious Choking Adult 
or Child 
If the choking person is coughing forcefully, let him or 
her try to cough up the object. A person who is getting 
enough air to cough or speak is getting enough air to 
breathe. Stay with the person and encourage him or her 
to continue coughing. 
 

--- Page 74 ---
62  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
FIGURE 4-6 Give chest thrusts to a choking person who is obviously 
pregnant or known to be pregnant or is too large for you to reach around.
giving back blows and abdominal thrusts. Using too 
much force may cause internal injuries.
A person who has choked and has been given back blows, 
abdominal thrusts and/or chest thrusts to clear the airway 
requires a medical evaluation. Internal injuries and 
damage to the airway may not be evident immediately.
Special Situations in Caring for the 
Conscious Choking Adult or Child 
Special situations include:
 ■ A large or pregnant person. If a conscious 
choking person is too large for you to reach around,
is obviously pregnant or is known to be pregnant, 
give chest thrusts instead (Fig. 4-6). Chest thrusts 
A conscious adult or child who has a completely blocked 
airway needs immediate care. Using more than one 
technique often is necessary to dislodge an object and 
clear a person’s airway. A combination of 5 back blows 
followed by 5 abdominal thrusts provides an effective 
way to clear the airway obstruction (Fig. 4-5, A–D).
To give back blows, position yourself slightly behind the 
person. Provide support by placing one arm diagonally 
across the chest and bend the person forward at the 
waist until the upper airway is at least parallel to the 
ground. Firmly strike the person between the shoulder 
blades with the heel of your other hand.
To give abdominal thrusts to a conscious choking adult 
or child:
 ■  Stand or kneel behind the person and wrap your arms 
around his or her waist. 
 ■  Locate the navel with one or two ﬁ ngers of one hand. 
Make a ﬁ st with the other hand and place the thumb 
side against the middle of the person’s abdomen, just 
above the navel and well below the lower tip of the 
breastbone. 
 ■  Grab your ﬁ  st with your other hand and give quick, 
upward thrusts into the abdomen. 
Each back blow and abdominal thrust should be a 
separate and distinct attempt to dislodge the obstruction. 
Continue sets of 5 back blows and 5 abdominal thrusts 
until the object is dislodged; the person can cough 
forcefully, speak or breathe; or the person becomes 
unconscious. For a conscious child, use less force when 
FIGURE 4-5, C–D If a conscious child has a completely blocked airway: C, Give back blows. D, Then give abdominal thrusts, as you 
would for an adult. 
C
 D
 

--- Page 75 ---
  CHAPTER  4    |    Breathing Emergencies 63
for a conscious adult are like abdominal thrusts, 
except for the placement of your hands. For chest 
thrusts, place your ﬁ  st against the center of the 
person’s breastbone. Then grab your ﬁ  st with your 
other hand and give quick thrusts into the chest. 
 ■ Being alone and choking. If you are alone 
and choking, bend over and press your abdomen 
against any ﬁ  rm object, such as the back of a chair, 
a railing or the kitchen sink (Fig. 4-7, A). Do not 
bend over anything with a sharp edge or corner 
that might hurt you, and be careful when leaning 
on a rail that is elevated. Alternatively, give yourself 
abdominal thrusts, using your hands, just as if you 
were administering the abdominal thrusts to another 
person (Fig. 4-7, B).
 ■ A person in a wheelchair. For a choking person in 
a wheelchair, give abdominal thrusts (Fig. 4-8).
Caring for a Conscious Choking Infant 
If you determine that a conscious infant cannot cough, 
cry or breathe, you will need to give a combination of 
5 back blows followed by 5 chest thrusts. 
To give back blows: 
 ■ Position the infant face-up on your forearm. 
 { Place one hand and forearm on the child’s back, 
cradling the back of the head, and one hand 
and forearm on the front of the infant. Use your 
thumb and fingers to hold the infant’s jaw while 
sandwiching the infant between your forearms. 
 { Turn the infant over so that he or she is face-down 
along your forearm (Fig. 4-9, A). 
 ■ Lower your arm onto your thigh so that the infant’s 
head is lower than his or her chest. Then give 5 ﬁ rm 
FIGURE 4-8 For a choking person in a wheelchair, 
give abdominal thrusts.
back blows with the heel of your hand between 
the shoulder blades (Fig. 4-9, B). Each back blow 
should be a separate and distinct attempt to dislodge 
the object. 
 ■ Maintain support of the infant’s head and neck by 
ﬁ rmly holding the jaw between your thumb and 
foreﬁ nger.
FIGURE 4-7, A–B If you are alone and choking; A, Bend over and 
press your abdomen against any ﬁ  rm object, such as the back of a 
chair. B, Or, give yourself abdominal thrusts by using your hands, just 
as you would do to another person.
A
 B
FIGURE 4-9, A–B A , To give back blows, position the 
infant so that he or she is face-down along your forearm. 
B, Give 5 ﬁ  rm back blows with the heel of your hand while 
supporting the arm that is holding the infant on your thigh. 
A
B
 

--- Page 76 ---
64  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
To give chest thrusts:
 ■ Place the infant in a face-up position. 
 { Place one hand and forearm on the child’s back, 
cradling the back of the head, while keeping your 
other hand and forearm on the front of the infant. 
Use your thumb and ﬁ ngers to hold the infant’s 
jaw while sandwiching the infant between your 
forearms (Fig. 4-10, A). 
 { Turn the infant onto his or her back. 
 ■ Lower your arm that is supporting the infant’s back 
onto your opposite thigh. The infant’s head should 
be lower than his or her chest, which will assist in 
dislodging the object. 
 ■ Place the pads of two or three ﬁ ngers in the center of 
the infant’s chest just below the nipple line (toward 
the infant’s feet). 
 ■ Use the pads of these ﬁ ngers to compress the 
breastbone. Compress the breastbone 5 times about 
1
1⁄2 inches and then let the breastbone return to its 
normal position. Keep your ﬁ ngers in contact with the 
infant’s breastbone (Fig. 4-10, B).
Continue giving sets of 5 back blows and 5 chest thrusts 
until the object is forced out; the infant begins to cough 
forcefully, cry or breathe on his or her own; or the infant 
becomes unconscious.
You can give back blows and chest thrusts effectively 
whether you stand, kneel or sit, as long as the infant 
is supported on your thigh and the infant’s head is 
lower than the chest. If the infant is large or your 
hands are too small to adequately support it, you 
may prefer to sit. 
Use less force when giving back blows and chest 
thrusts to an infant than for a child or an adult. 
Using too much force may cause internal 
injuries.
Caring for a Conscious Choking Adult or 
Child Who Becomes Unconscious
If the adult or child becomes unconscious, carefully 
lower him or her to the ground and begin CPR, starting 
with compressions. (See pages 42 and 43.)
Caring for a Conscious Choking 
Infant Who Becomes Unconscious
If the infant becomes unconscious, carefully place him 
or her on a ﬁ rm, ﬂ at surface and begin CPR, starting 
with compressions. (See page 44.)
PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER
In a breathing emergency, seconds count so it is 
important to act at once. Breathing emergencies 
include respiratory distress, respiratory arrest 
and choking. Look for signals that indicate a 
person is having trouble breathing, is not 
breathing or is choking. When you recognize 
that an adult, a child or an infant is having 
trouble breathing, is not breathing or is choking, 
call 9-1-1 or the local emergency number 
immediately. Then give care for the condition 
until help arrives and takes over. You could 
save a life. 
FIGURE 4-10, A–B A ,  To give chest thrusts, sandwich the infant 
between your forearms. Continue to support the infant’s head. B, Turn 
the infant onto his or her back keeping the infant’s head lower than the 
chest. Give 5 chest thrusts. 
A
B
 

--- Page 77 ---
  CHAPTER  4    |    Breathing Emergencies 65
AFTER CHECKING THE SCENE AND THE INJURED OR ILL PE RSON, 
HAVE SOMEONE CALL 9-1-1 AND GET CONSENT.
  GIVE 5 BACK BLOWS 
Bend the person forward at the waist and give 5 back 
blows between the shoulder blades with the heel of 
one hand.
  GIVE 5 ABDOMINAL THRUSTS 
 ■Place a ﬁ  st with the thumb side against the 
middle of the person’s abdomen, just above 
the navel. 
 ■Cover your ﬁ  st with your other hand.
 ■Give 5 quick, upward abdominal thrusts.
  CONTINUE CARE 
Continue sets of 5 back blows and 5 abdominal thrusts 
until the:
 ■Object is forced out.
 ■Person can cough forcefully or breathe.
 ■Person becomes unconscious.
  WHAT TO DO NEXT 
 ■IF PERSON BECOMES UNCONSCIOUS—CALL  9-1-1, if not already done.
 ■Carefully lower the person to the ground and begin CPR, starting with compressions.
CONSCIOUS CHOKING—ADULT
CANNOT COUGH, SPEAK OR BREATHE 
SKILL SHEET
 

--- Page 78 ---
66  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
SKILL SHEET
CONSCIOUS CHOKING—CHILD
CANNOT COUGH, SPEAK OR BREATHE 
AFTER CHECKING THE SCENE AND THE INJURED OR ILL CHILD, HAVE SOMEONE 
CALL 9-1-1 AND GET CONSENT FROM THE PARENT OR GUARDIAN, IF PRESENT.
  GIVE 5 BACK BLOWS 
Bend the child forward at the waist and give 5 back 
blows between the shoulder blades with the heel 
of one hand.
  GIVE 5 ABDOMINAL THRUSTS 
 ■Place a ﬁ  st with the thumb side against the 
middle of the child’s abdomen, just above 
the navel. 
 ■Cover your ﬁ  st with your other hand. 
 ■Give 5 quick, upward abdominal thrusts.
  CONTINUE CARE 
Continue sets of 5 back blows and 5 abdominal 
thrusts until the:
 ■Object is forced out.
 ■Child can cough forcefully or breathe.
 ■Child becomes unconscious.
  WHAT TO DO NEXT  
 ■IF CHILD BECOMES UNCONSCIOUS—CALL 9-1-1, if not already done. 
 ■Carefully lower the child to the ground and begin CPR, starting with compressions. 
TIP: Stand or kneel behind the child, depending on his or her size. 
 

--- Page 79 ---
  CHAPTER  4    |    Breathing Emergencies 67
AFTER CHECKING THE SCENE AND THE INJURED OR ILL INFANT, HAVE SOMEONE 
CALL 9-1-1 AND GET CONSENT FROM PARENT OR GUARDIAN, IF PRESENT.
  GIVE 5 BACK BLOWS 
Give ﬁ  rm back blows with the heel of one hand between 
the infant’s shoulder blades.
  GIVE 5 CHEST THRUSTS 
Place two or three ﬁ  ngers in the center of the infant’s chest 
just below the nipple line and compress the breastbone 
about 
1½ inches.
  CONTINUE CARE 
Continue sets of 5 back blows and 5 chest thrusts until the:
 ■Object is forced out.
 ■Infant can cough forcefully, cry or breathe.
 ■Infant becomes unconscious.
  WHAT TO DO NEXT 
 ■IF INFANT BECOMES UNCONSCIOUS—CALL 9-1-1, if not already done. 
 ■Carefully place the infant on a ﬁ rm, ﬂ at surface, and begin CPR, starting with compressions. 
CONSCIOUS CHOKING—INFANT
CANNOT COUGH, CRY OR BREATHE
SKILL SHEET
TIP: Support the head and neck securely when giving 
back blows and chest thrusts. Keep the head lower 
than the chest.
 

--- Page 80 ---
68  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
Sudden Illness
I
f a person suddenly becomes ill, it is important to respond quickly and effectively. When illness happens 
suddenly it can be hard to determine what is wrong and what you should do to help. 
In this chapter you will read about the signals of sudden illnesses including fainting, seizures, stroke, diabetic 
emergencies, allergic reactions, poisoning and substance abuse. This chapter also discusses how to care for speciﬁ c 
sudden illnesses, even if you do not know the exact cause. 
CHAPTER   5
 

--- Page 81 ---
  CHAPTER  5    |    Sudden Illness 69
SUDDEN ILLNESS
It usually is obvious when someone is injured and 
needs care. The person may be able to tell you what 
happened and what hurts. Checking the person also 
gives you clues about what might be wrong. However, 
when someone becomes suddenly ill, it is not as easy 
to tell what is physically wrong. At times, there are no 
signals to give clues about what is happening. At other 
times, the signals only conﬁ  rm that something is wrong, 
without being clear as to what is wrong. In either case, 
the signals of a sudden illness often are confusing. 
You may ﬁ  nd it difﬁ  cult to determine if the person’s 
condition is an emergency and whether to call 9-1-1 or 
the local emergency number.
What to Look For
When a person becomes suddenly ill, he or she usually 
looks and feels sick. Common signals include:
 ■ Changes in level of consciousness, such as feeling 
lightheaded, dizzy, drowsy or confused, or becoming 
unconscious.
 ■ Breathing problems (i.e., trouble breathing or no 
breathing).
 ■ Signals of a possible heart attack, including persistent 
chest pain, discomfort or pressure lasting more than 
a few minutes that goes away and comes back or 
that spreads to the shoulder, arm, neck, jaw, stomach 
or back.
 ■ Signals of a stroke, including sudden weakness on one 
side of the face (facial droop); sudden weakness, often 
on one side of the body; sudden slurred speech or 
trouble forming words; or a sudden, severe headache. 
 ■ Loss of vision or blurred vision.
 ■ Signals of shock, including rapid breathing, changes 
in skin appearance and cool, pale or ashen 
(grayish) skin.
 ■ Sweating.
 ■ Persistent abdominal pain or pressure.
 ■ Nausea or vomiting.
 ■ Diarrhea.
 ■ Seizures.
Look around the area for clues that might tell you what 
is wrong with the person. This may help you to ﬁ nd out 
what the person was doing when the illness started. 
For example, if someone working in a hot environment 
suddenly becomes ill, it would make sense to conclude 
that the illness resulted from the heat. If someone 
suddenly feels ill or acts strangely and is attempting 
to take medication, the medication may be a clue as to 
what is wrong. For example, the person may need the 
medication for a heart condition and is trying to take it 
to avoid a medical emergency.
When to Call 9-1-1
Call 9-1-1 or the local emergency for any of the following 
conditions:
 ■ Unconsciousness or altered level of consciousness 
 ■ Breathing problems
 ■ No breathing 
 ■ Chest pain, discomfort or pressure lasting more 
than 3 to 5 minutes that goes away and comes back 
or that radiates to the shoulder, arm, jaw, neck, 
stomach or back
 ■ Persistent abdominal pain or pressure
 ■ Severe external bleeding (bleeding that spurts or 
gushes steadily from a wound)
 ■ Vomiting blood or passing blood
 ■ Severe (critical) burns
 ■ Suspected poisoning
 ■ Seizures
 ■ Stroke 
 ■ Suspected or obvious injuries to the head, neck or spine
 ■ Painful, swollen, deformed areas (indicates possible 
broken bone) or an open fracture
With some sudden illnesses, you might not be sure 
whether to call 9-1-1 or the local emergency number for 
help. Sometimes the signals come and go. Remember, 
if you cannot sort out the problem quickly and easily or 
if you have any doubts about the severity of the illness, 
make the call for help. 
What to Do Until Help Arrives
Although you may not know the exact cause of the 
sudden illness, you should still give care. Initially 
you will care for the signals and not for any speciﬁ c 
condition. In the few cases in which you know that 
the person has a medical condition, such as diabetes, 
epilepsy or heart disease, the care you give may be 
slightly different. This care may involve helping the 
person take medication for his or her speciﬁ c illness.
Care for sudden illnesses by following the same general 
guidelines as you would for any emergency. 
 ■ Do no further harm.
 ■ Check the scene for safety, and then check the person. 
 ■ First care for life-threatening conditions such as 
unconsciousness; trouble breathing; no breathing; 
severe bleeding; severe chest pain; or signals of a stroke, 
such as weakness, numbness or trouble with speech. 
 ■ Help the person to rest comfortably. 
 ■ Keep the person from getting chilled or overheated. 
 ■ Reassure the person because he or she may be 
anxious or frightened. 
 ■ Watch for changes in consciousness and breathing. 
 

--- Page 82 ---
70  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
 ■ If the person is conscious, ask if he or she has any 
medical conditions or is taking any medication.
 ■ Do not give the person anything to eat or drink unless 
he or she is fully conscious, is able to swallow and 
does not show any signals of a stroke.
 ■ If the person vomits and is unconscious and lying 
down, position the person on his or her side so that 
you can clear the mouth.
 ■ If you know the person is having a severe allergic 
reaction or a diabetic emergency, assist the person 
with his or her prescribed medication, if asked. 
SPECIFIC SUDDEN 
ILLNESSES
Some sudden illnesses may be linked with chronic 
conditions. These conditions include degenerative 
diseases, such as heart and lung diseases. There may be 
a hormone imbalance, such as in diabetes. The person 
could have epilepsy, a condition that causes seizures. 
An allergy can cause a sudden and sometimes dangerous 
reaction to certain substances. When checking a person, 
look for a medical identiﬁ  cation (ID) tag, bracelet, 
necklace or anklet indicating that the person has a 
chronic condition or allergy.
Having to deal with a sudden illness can be frightening, 
especially when you do not know what is wrong. Do 
not hesitate to give care. Remember, you do not have 
to know the cause to help. Signals for sudden illnesses 
are similar to other conditions and the care probably 
involves skills that you already know.
Fainting
One common signal of sudden illness is a loss of 
consciousness, such as when a person faints. Fainting 
is a temporary loss of consciousness. When someone 
suddenly loses consciousness and then reawakens, he 
or she may simply have fainted. 
Fainting occurs when there is an insufﬁ cient supply 
of blood to the brain for a short period of time. This 
condition results from a widening of the blood vessels in 
the body. This causes blood to drain away from the brain 
to the rest of the body. 
Fainting usually is not harmful. The person usually 
recovers quickly with no lasting effects. However, what 
appears to be a simple case of fainting actually may be 
a signal of a more serious condition. 
What to Look For
A person who is about to faint often becomes pale, 
begins to sweat and then loses consciousness and 
collapses. A person who feels weak or dizzy may prevent 
a fainting spell by lying down or sitting with his or her 
head level with the knees.
When to Call 9-1-1
Call 9-1-1 or the local emergency number when 
in doubt about the condition of a person who has 
fainted. It is always appropriate to seek medical care 
for fainting.
What to Do Until Help Arrives
Lower the person to the ground or other ﬂ at surface 
and position him or her on his or her back, lying ﬂ at. 
Loosen any tight clothing, such as a tie or collar 
(Fig. 5-1). Check that the person is breathing. Do not 
give the person anything to eat or drink. If the person 
vomits, roll him or her onto one side. 
Seizures
When the normal functions of the brain are disrupted 
by injury, disease, fever, infection, metabolic 
disturbances or conditions causing a decreased oxygen 
level, a seizure may occur. The seizure is a result of 
abnormal electrical activity in the brain and causes 
temporary, involuntary changes in body movement, 
function, sensation, awareness or behavior.
Epilepsy 
Epilepsy is a chronic seizure condition. Almost 
3 million Americans have some form of epilepsy. 
The seizures that occur with epilepsy usually can be 
controlled with medication. Still, some people with 
epilepsy who take seizure medication occasionally 
have seizures. Others who go a long time without 
a seizure may think that the condition has gone 
away and stop taking their medication, thus putting 
themselves at risk for another seizure. 
FIGURE 5-1 To care for a person who has fainted, place the person 
on his or her back lying ﬂ  at and loosen any restrictive clothing, such as 
a tie or collar. 
 

--- Page 83 ---
  CHAPTER  5    |    Sudden Illness 71
Febrile Seizures 
Young children and infants may be at risk for febrile 
seizures, which are seizures brought on by a rapid 
increase in body temperature. They are most common 
in children younger than 5 years. 
Febrile seizures often are caused by infections of the ear, 
throat or digestive system and are most likely to occur 
when a child or an infant experiences a rapid rise in 
temperature. A child or an infant experiencing a febrile 
seizure may experience some or all of the signals 
listed below.
What to Look For
Signals of seizures include:
 ■ A blank stare. 
 ■ A period of distorted sensation during which the 
person is unable to respond.
 ■ Uncontrolled muscular contractions, called 
convulsions, which last several minutes. 
A person with epilepsy may experience something called 
an aura before the seizure occurs. An aura is an unusual 
sensation or feeling, such as a visual hallucination; strange 
sound, taste or smell; or an urgent need to get to safety. If 
the person recognizes the aura, he or she may have time to 
tell bystanders and sit down before the seizure occurs.
Febrile seizures may have some or all of the following 
signals:
 ■ Sudden rise in body temperature
 ■ Change in consciousness
 ■ Rhythmic jerking of the head and limbs
 ■ Loss of bladder or bowel control 
 ■ Confusion
 ■ Drowsiness
 ■ Crying out
 ■ Becoming rigid
 ■ Holding breath
 ■ Upward rolling of the eyes
Although it may be frightening to see someone 
unexpectedly having a seizure, you should remember 
that most seizures last only for a few minutes and the 
person usually recovers without problems.
When to Call 9-1-1
Call 9-1-1 or the local emergency number if:
 ■ The seizure lasts more than 5 minutes.
 ■ The person has multiple seizures with no signs of 
slowing down.
 ■ The person appears to be injured or fails to regain 
consciousness after the seizure.
 ■ The cause of the seizure is unknown.
 ■ The person is pregnant.
 ■ The person has diabetes.
 ■ The person is a young child or an infant and 
experienced a febrile seizure brought on by a high fever.
 ■ The seizure takes place in water.
 ■ The person is elderly and could have suffered a stroke.
 ■ This is the person’s ﬁ rst seizure.
If the person is known to have occasional seizures, 
you may not have to call 9-1-1 or the local emergency 
number. He or she usually will recover from a seizure in 
a few minutes. 
What to Do Until Help Arrives
Although it may be frightening to watch, you can easily 
help to care for a person having a seizure. Remember 
that he or she cannot control the seizure. Do not try 
to stop the seizure. General principles of managing 
a seizure are to prevent injury, protect the person’s 
airway and make sure that the airway is open after the 
seizure has ended. 
Do not hold or restrain the person. Do not put anything 
in the person’s mouth or between the teeth. People 
having seizures rarely bite their tongues or cheeks with 
enough force to cause signiﬁ cant bleeding; however, 
some blood may be present.
Make sure that the environment is as safe as possible 
to prevent injury to the person who is having a seizure. 
Remove any nearby furniture or other objects that may 
injure the person. 
Give care to a person who has had a seizure the same 
way you would for an unconscious person. When the 
seizure is over, make sure that the person’s airway 
is open. Usually, the person will begin to breathe 
normally. If there is ﬂ  uid in the person’s mouth, 
such as saliva, blood or vomit, roll him or her on one 
side so that the ﬂ  uid drains from the mouth. If the 
child or infant has a febrile seizure, it is important to 
immediately cool the body by giving a sponge bath 
with lukewarm water. 
The person may be drowsy and disoriented or 
unresponsive for a period of time. Check to see if he 
or she was injured during the seizure. Be comforting
and reassuring. If the seizure occurred in public, the 
person may be embarrassed and self-conscious. Ask 
bystanders not to crowd around the person. He or she 
may be tired and want to rest. Stay on the scene with 
the person until he or she is fully conscious and aware 
of the surroundings.
For more information on epilepsy, visit the Epilepsy 
Foundation at epilepsyfoundation.org.
 

--- Page 84 ---
72  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
Stroke 
Stroke is the third-leading killer and a leading cause 
of long-term disability in the United States. Nearly 
800,000 Americans will have a stroke this year. 
A stroke, also called a brain attack, is caused when 
blood ﬂ ow to a part of the brain is cut off or when there 
is bleeding into the brain. Strokes can cause permanent 
brain damage, but sometimes the damage can be 
stopped or reversed. 
A stroke usually is caused by a blockage in the arteries 
that supply blood to the brain. Once the blood ﬂ ow is 
cut off, that part of the brain starts to “suffocate” and 
die unless the blood ﬂ ow can be restored. Blockages can 
be caused by blood clots that travel from other parts of 
the body, like the heart, or they can be caused by slow 
damage to the arteries over time from diseases such as 
high blood pressure and diabetes. 
In a small percentage of strokes there is bleeding into 
the brain. This bleeding can be from a broken blood 
vessel or from a bulging aneurysm that has broken open. 
There is no way to tell the type of stroke until the person 
gets to an emergency room and undergoes a thorough 
medical evaluation.
A mini-stroke is when a person has the signals of a stroke, 
which then completely go away. Most mini-strokes get 
better within a few minutes, although they can last several 
hours. Although the signals of a mini-stroke disappear 
quickly, the person is not out of danger at that point. 
In fact, someone who has a mini-stroke is at very high 
risk of having a full stroke within the next 2 days. 
Risk Factors
The risk factors for stroke, meaning things that make a 
stroke more likely, are similar to those for heart disease. 
Some risk factors are beyond one’s control, such as age, 
gender and family history of stroke or cardiovascular 
disease. Other risk factors can be controlled through diet, 
changes in lifestyle or medication. With a history of high 
blood pressure, previous stroke or mini-stroke, diabetes 
or heart disease one’s chances of a stroke increases. 
High Blood Pressure
Uncontrolled high blood pressure is the number one 
risk factor for stroke. If you have high blood pressure, 
you are approximately seven times more likely to have a 
stroke compared with someone who does not have high 
blood pressure. 
High blood pressure puts added pressure on arteries 
and makes them stiffer. The excess pressure also 
damages organs, including the brain, heart and kidneys. 
Even mildly elevated blood pressure can increase one’s 
risk of a stroke. 
High blood pressure is the most important of the 
controllable risk factors. Have your blood pressure 
checked regularly and if it is high, follow the advice of 
your health care provider about how to lower it. Often, 
high blood pressure can be controlled by losing weight, 
changing diet, exercising routinely and managing stress. 
If those measures are not sufﬁ  cient, your health care 
provider may prescribe medication. 
Diabetes
Diabetes is a major risk factor for stroke. If you have 
been diagnosed with diabetes, follow the advice of 
your health care provider about how to control it. If 
uncontrolled, the resulting elevated blood sugar levels 
can damage blood vessels throughout the body.
Cigarette Smoking
Cigarette smoking is another major risk factor of 
stroke. Smoking is linked to heart disease and cancer, 
as well as to stroke. Smoking increases blood pressure, 
damages blood vessels and makes blood more likely 
to clot. If you smoke and would like to quit, many 
techniques and support systems are available to help, 
including seeking help from your health care provider 
and local health department.
The beneﬁ  ts of quitting smoking begin as soon as you 
stop, and some of the damage from smoking actually 
may be reversible. Approximately 10 years after a 
person has stopped smoking, his or her risk of stroke 
is about the same as the risk for a person who has 
never smoked. Even if you do not smoke, be aware 
that inhaling smoke from smokers can harm your 
health. Avoid long-term exposure to cigarette smoke 
and protect children from this danger as well.
Diet
Diets that are high in saturated fats and cholesterol can 
increase your risk of stroke by causing fatty materials to 
build up on the walls of your blood vessels. Foods high in 
cholesterol include egg yolks and organ meats, such as liver 
and kidneys. Saturated fats are found in beef, lamb, veal, 
pork, ham, whole milk and whole-milk products. Limiting 
your intake of these foods can help to prevent stroke. 
Preventing Stroke 
You can help prevent stroke if you: 
 ■ Control your blood pressure.
 ■ Quit smoking.
 ■ Eat a healthy diet.
 ■ Exercise regularly. Regular exercise reduces your 
chances of stroke by strengthening the heart and 
improv ing blood circulation. Exercise also helps in 
weight control. 
 

--- Page 85 ---
  CHAPTER  5    |    Sudden Illness 73
 ■ Maintain a healthy weight. Being overweight increases 
the chance of developing high blood pressure, heart 
disease and fat deposits lining the arteries.
 ■ Control diabetes. 
What to Look For
As with other sudden illnesses, looking or feeling ill, or 
behaving in a strange way, are common, general signals 
of a stroke or mini-stroke. Other speciﬁ c signals of 
stroke have a sudden onset, including:
 ■ Weakness or numbness of the face, arm or leg. 
This usually happens on only one side of the body. 
 ■ Facial droop or drooling.
 ■ Trouble with speech. The person may have 
trouble talking, getting words out or being 
understood when speaking and may have trouble 
understanding. 
 ■ Loss of vision or disturbed (blurred or dimmed) 
vision in one or both eyes. The pupils may be of 
unequal size. 
 ■ Sudden severe headache. The person will not know 
what caused the headache and may describe it as 
“the worst headache ever.”
 ■ Dizziness, confusion, agitation, loss of consciousness 
or other severe altered mental status. 
 ■ Loss of balance or coordination, trouble walking or 
ringing in the ears.
 ■ Incontinence.
Think FAST for a Stroke
For a stroke, think FAST, which stands for the 
following:
 ■ Face: Weakness, numbness or drooping on one side 
of the face. Ask the person to smile. Does one side of 
the face droop (Fig. 5-2, A)?
 ■ Arm: Weakness or numbness in one arm. Ask 
the person to raise both arms. Does one arm drift 
downward (Fig. 5-2, B)?
 ■ Speech: Slurred speech or difﬁ  culty speaking. Ask the 
person to repeat a simple sentence (e.g., Ask the person 
to say something like, “The sky is blue.”) Are the words 
slurred? Can the person repeat the sentence correctly?
 ■ Time: Try to determine when the signals began. If the 
person shows any signals of stroke, time is critical. 
Call 9-1-1 or the local emergency number right away. 
The FAST mnemonic is based on the Cincinnati 
Pre-Hospital Stroke Scale. This scale originally was 
developed for EMS personnel in 1997. The scale was 
designed to help EMS personnel to identify strokes in 
the ﬁ eld. The FAST method for public awareness has 
been in use in the community in Cincinnati, Ohio, since 
1999. Researchers at the University of North Carolina 
validated it in 2003 as an appropriate tool for helping 
lay persons to recognize and respond quickly to the 
signals of stroke. 
By paying attention to the signals of stroke and reporting 
them to your health care provider, you can prevent 
damage before it occurs. Experiencing a mini-stroke 
is the clearest warning that a stroke may occur. Do not 
ignore its stroke-like signals, even if they disappear 
completely within minutes or hours.
When to Call 9-1-1
Call 9-1-1 or the local emergency number immediately 
if you encounter someone who is having or has had a 
stroke, if you see signals of a stroke or if the person had 
a mini-stroke (even if the signals have gone away). Note 
the time of onset of signals and report it to the call taker 
or EMS personnel when they arrive.
In the past, a stroke usually caused permanent 
brain damage. Today, new medications and medical 
FIGURE 5-2, A–B Signals of stroke include A, facial drooping, and B, weakness on one side of the body.
A B
 

--- Page 86 ---
74  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
procedures can limit or reduce the damage caused 
by stroke. Many of these new treatments must be 
given quickly to be the most helpful. It is important 
for the person to get the best care as quickly as 
possible. 
What to Do Until Help Arrives
Note the time that the signals started. If the person 
is unconscious, make sure that he or she has an open 
airway and care for life-threatening conditions. If ﬂ uid 
or vomit is in the person’s mouth, position him or her 
on one side to allow ﬂ  uids to drain out of the mouth. 
Remove any material from the mouth with a ﬁ nger 
if the person is unconscious. Stay with the person 
and monitor breathing and for any changes in the 
person’s condition. 
If the person is conscious, check for non-life-threatening 
conditions. A stroke can make the person fearful and 
anxious. Often, he or she does not understand what has 
happened. Offer comfort and reassurance. Have the 
person rest in a comfortable position. Do not give him 
or her anything to eat or drink. 
Diabetic Emergencies 
A total of 23.6 million people in the United States 
(7.8% of the population) have diabetes. Among this 
group, more than 5 million people are unaware that 
they have the disease. Diabetes was the seventh-
leading cause of death listed on U.S. death certiﬁ  cates 
in 2006. Altogether, diabetes contributed to 233,619 
deaths in 2005. Diabetes is likely to be underreported 
as a cause of death. Overall, the risk for death among 
people with diabetes is about twice that of people 
without diabetes.
The American Diabetes Association deﬁ nes diabetes 
as the inability of the body to change sugar (glucose) 
from food into energy. This process is regulated by 
insulin, a hormone produced in the pancreas. Diabetes 
can lead to other medical conditions such as blindness, 
nerve disease, kidney disease, heart disease and 
stroke. 
The cells in your body need glucose (sugar) as a source 
of energy. The cells receive this energy during digestion 
or from stored forms of sugar. The sugar is absorbed 
into the bloodstream with the help of insulin. Insulin 
is produced in the pancreas. For the body to properly 
function, there has to be a balance of insulin and sugar. 
People who have diabetes may become suddenly ill 
because there is too much or too little sugar in their 
blood.
There are two major types of diabetes: Type I and 
Type II diabetes. 
Type I diabetes, formerly called juvenile diabetes, 
affects about 1 million Americans. This type of 
diabetes, which usually begins in childhood, occurs 
when the body produces little or no insulin. People 
with Type I diabetes must inject insulin into their 
bodies daily and are therefore considered to be 
insulin-dependent. Type I diabetes is a chronic disease 
that currently has no cure.
The exact cause of Type I diabetes is not known. 
Warning signals include: 
 ■ Frequent urination.
 ■ Increased hunger and thirst.
 ■ Unexpected weight loss.
 ■ Irritability.
 ■ Weakness and fatigue.
Type II diabetes is the most common type, affecting 
about 90 to 95 percent of people with diabetes. This 
condition usually occurs in adults but also can occur 
in children. With Type II diabetes, the body makes 
insulin but not enough to meet the body’s needs or 
the body becomes resistant to the insulin produced. 
Since Type II diabetes is a progressive disease, people 
with this type of diabetes eventually may need to use 
insulin. 
People from certain racial and ethnic backgrounds 
are known to be at greater risk for diabetes. Type II 
diabetes is more common among African-Americans, 
Latinos, Asians, certain Native Americans and Paciﬁ  c 
Islanders. Although genetics and other factors increase 
risk for diabetes, being overweight or obese also is a 
risk factor for developing the disease in adults and 
children. 
People with Type II diabetes often do not experience 
any warning signals. Possible warning signals of Type II 
diabetes include: 
 ■ Any signals of Type I diabetes.
 ■ Frequent infections, especially involving the skin, 
gums and bladder.
 ■ Blurred vision.
 ■ Numbness in the legs, feet and ﬁ ngers.
 ■ Cuts or bruises that are slow to heal.
 ■ Itching.
People with diabetes should monitor their exercise 
and diet. Self-monitoring for blood sugar levels is a 
valuable tool. Insulin-dependent diabetics also must 
monitor their use of insulin. If the person with diabetes 
does not control these factors, he or she can have 
a diabetic emergency.
 

--- Page 87 ---
  CHAPTER  5    |    Sudden Illness 75
A diabetic emergency is caused by an imbalance between 
sugar and insulin in the body (Fig. 5-3). A diabetic 
emergency can happen when there is:
 ■ Too much sugar in the blood (hyperglycemia): 
Among other causes, the person may not have taken 
enough insulin or the person is reacting adversely to a 
large meal or a meal that is high in carbohydrates. 
 ■ Too little sugar in the blood (hypoglycemia): The 
person may have taken too much insulin, eaten too little 
food, or overexerted him- or herself. Extremely low 
blood sugar levels can quickly become life threatening.
What to Look For
Signals of a diabetic emergency include: 
 ■ Changes in the level of consciousness.
 ■ Changes in mood.
 ■ Rapid breathing and pulse.
 ■ Feeling and looking ill.
 ■ Dizziness and headache.
 ■ Confusion.
When to Call 9-1-1
Always call 9-1-1 or the local emergency number if: 
 ■ The person is unconscious or about to lose 
consciousness. In this situation, do not give the person 
anything by mouth. After calling 9-1-1 or the local 
emergency number, care for the person in the same 
way you would care for an unconscious person. This 
includes making sure the person’s airway is clear of 
vomit, checking for breathing and giving care until 
advanced medical personnel take over.
 ■ The person is conscious but unable to swallow. 
(In this case, do not put anything, liquid or solid, 
into the person’s mouth.)
 ■ The person does not feel better within about 
5 minutes after taking some form of sugar. 
 ■ You cannot ﬁ nd any form of sugar immediately. Do 
not spend time looking for it. 
What to Do Until Help Arrives
You may know the person is a diabetic or the person 
may tell you he or she is a diabetic. Often diabetics 
know what is wrong and will ask for something with 
sugar in it. They may carry some form of sugar with 
them in case they need it. 
If the diabetic person is conscious and able to swallow, 
and advises you that he or she needs sugar, give sugar 
in the form of several glucose tablets or glucose paste, a 
12-ounce serving of fruit juice, milk, nondiet soft drink 
or table sugar dissolved in a glass of water  (Fig. 5-4). 
Most fruit juices and nondiet soft drinks have enough 
sugar to be effective. If the problem is too much sugar, 
this amount of sugar will not cause further harm. 
Diabetics also may carry glucagon, which they can 
self-administer to counter hypoglycemia. People who 
take insulin to control diabetes may have injectable 
medication with them to care for hyperglycemia. 
FIGURE 5-3 Hypoglycemia and hyperglycemia are diabetic emergencies that result from an imbalance between 
sugar and insulin within the body.
Insulin
Insulin
Sugar
Sugar
HYPERGLYCEMIA HYPOGLYCEMIA
FIGURE 5-4 If the person having a diabetic emergency is 
conscious and able to swallow, give him or her sugar, preferably 
glucose tablets or in liquid form. 
 

--- Page 88 ---
76  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
For more information about diabetes, contact the 
American Diabetes Association at 1-800-DIABETES, go 
to diabetes.org or visit the National Diabetes Education 
Program website at ndep.nih.gov. For speciﬁ c 
information about Type I diabetes, contact the Juvenile 
Diabetes Foundation at 1-800-533-CURE or at jdrf.org.
Allergic Reactions
Allergic reactions are caused by over activity of the 
immune system against speciﬁ c antigens (foreign 
substances). People with allergies are especially sensitive 
to these antigens. When their immune systems overreact 
to the antigens it is called an allergic reaction. 
Antigens that often cause allergic reactions in at-risk 
people include the following:
 ■ Bee or insect venom
 ■ Antibiotics
 ■ Pollen
 ■ Animal dander
 ■ Latex
 ■ Sulfa drugs
 ■ Certain foods (e.g., tree nuts, peanuts, shellﬁ sh and 
dairy products)
People who know that they are severely allergic to certain 
substances or bee stings may wear a medical ID tag, 
necklace or bracelet. 
What to Look For
Allergic reactions can range from mild to severe. An 
example of a mild reaction is an itchy skin rash from 
touching poison ivy. Severe allergic reactions can cause 
a life-threatening condition called anaphylaxis (also 
called anaphylactic shock). Anaphylaxis usually occurs 
suddenly. It happens within seconds or minutes after 
contact with the substance. The skin or area of the body 
that comes in contact with the substance usually swells 
and turns red. Other signals include the following:
 ■ Hives
 ■ Itching
 ■ Rash 
 ■ Weakness 
 ■ Nausea
 ■ Stomach cramps
 ■ Vomiting
 ■ Dizziness
 ■ Trouble breathing (including coughing and wheezing)
Trouble breathing can progress to a blocked airway as 
the lips, tongue, throat and larynx (voice box) swell. 
Low blood pressure and shock may accompany 
these reactions. Death from anaphylaxis may 
happen quickly because the person’s breathing is 
restricted severely.
When to Call 9-1-1
Call 9-1-1 or the local emergency number if the person:
 ■ Has trouble breathing. 
 ■ Complains of the throat tightening.
 ■ Explains that he or she is subject to severe 
allergic reactions. 
 ■ Is unconscious. 
What to Do Until Help Arrives
If you suspect anaphylaxis and have called 9-1-1 or the 
local emergency number, follow these guidelines for 
giving care:
1.  Monitor the person’s breathing and for any 
changes in the person’s condition. 
2. Give care for life-threatening emergencies.
3. Check a conscious person to determine:
 { The substance (antigen) involved.
 { The route of exposure to the antigen.
 { The effects of the exposure.
4.  Assist the person with using an epinephrine auto-
injector, if available and state or local regulations 
allow.
5.  Assist the person with taking an antihistamine, 
if available.
6.  Document any changes in the person’s condition 
over time.
For more information on anaphylaxis, see Chapter 11.
POISONING
A poison is any substance that causes injury, illness 
or death if it enters the body. In 2008, Poison Control 
Centers (PCCs) received more than 2.4 million calls 
having to do with people who had come into contact 
with a poison. Over 93 percent of these poisonings took 
place in the home. Fifty percent (1.2 million) involved 
children younger than 6 years. Poisoning deaths in 
children younger than 6 years represented about 2 
percent of the total deaths from poisoning. The 20- to 
59-year-old age group represented about 76 percent of 
all deaths from poisoning. 
In recent years there has been a decrease in child 
poisonings. This is due partly to child-resistant packaging 
for medications. This packaging makes it harder for 
children to get into these substances. The decrease also is a 
result of preventive actions by parents and others who care 
for children. At the same time, there has been an increase 
in adult poisoning deaths. This increase is linked to an 
increase in both suicides and drug-related poisonings. 
 

--- Page 89 ---
  CHAPTER  5    |    Sudden Illness 77
Types of Poisoning
A person can be poisoned by swallowing poison, breathing 
it, absorbing it through the skin and by having it injected 
into the body. 
Swallowed Poisons
Poisons that can be swallowed include foods, such 
as certain mushrooms and shellﬁ  sh; an overdose of 
drugs, such as sleeping pills, tranquilizers and alcohol; 
medications, such as a high quantity of aspirin; household 
items, such as cleaning products and pesticides; and 
certain plants. Many substances that are not poisonous 
in small amounts are poisonous in larger amounts. 
Combining certain substances can result in poisoning, 
although if taken by themselves they might not cause harm.
Inhaled Poisons
A person can be poisoned by breathing in (inhaling) toxic 
fumes. Examples of poisons that can be inhaled include:
 ■ Gases, such as: 
 { Carbon monoxide from an engine or car exhaust.
 { Carbon dioxide from wells and sewers.
 { Chlorine, found in many swimming pools.
 ■ Fumes from:
 { Household products, such as glues and paints.
 ■ Drugs, such as crack cocaine.
Absorbed Poisons
Poisons that can be absorbed through the skin come from 
many sources including plants, such as poison ivy, poison 
oak and poison sumac, and fertilizers and pesticides. 
Injected Poisons
Injected poisons enter the body through the bites or 
stings of insects, spiders, ticks, some marine life, snakes 
and other animals or through drugs or medications 
injected with a hypodermic needle.
What to Look For
How will you know if someone who is ill has been 
poisoned? Look for clues about what has happened. Try to 
get information from the person or from bystanders. As you 
check the scene, be aware of unusual odors, ﬂ ames, smoke, 
open or spilled containers, an open medicine cabinet or an 
overturned or a damaged plant. Also, notice if the person is 
showing any of the following signals of poisoning: 
 ■ Nausea and vomiting
 ■ Diarrhea
 ■ Chest or abdominal pain 
 ■ Trouble breathing
 ■ Sweating
 ■ Changes in consciousness 
 ■ Seizures
 ■ Headache
 ■ Dizziness
 ■ Weakness
 ■ Irregular pupil size
 ■ Burning or tearing eyes
 ■ Abnormal skin color
 ■ Burns around the lips, tongue or on the skin
You also may suspect a poisoning based on information 
from or about the person. If you suspect someone has 
swallowed a poison, try to ﬁ nd out:
 ■ The type of poison.
 ■ The quantity taken.
 ■ When it was taken.
 ■ How much the person weighs.
This information can help you and others to give the 
most appropriate care.
When to Call 9-1-1
For life-threatening conditions (such as if a person 
is unconscious or is not breathing or if a change in 
the level of consciousness occurs), CALL 9-1-1 or 
local emergency number. If the person is conscious 
and alert, CALL the National Poison Control Center 
(PCC) hotline at 1-800-222-1222 and follow the 
advice given. 
What to Do Until Help Arrives
After you have checked the scene and determined that 
there has been a poisoning, follow these general care 
guidelines: 
 ■ Remove the person from the source of poison if the 
scene is dangerous. Do this only if you are able to 
without endangering yourself.
 ■ Check the person’s level of consciousness and 
breathing.
 ■ Care for any life-threatening conditions.
 ■ If the person is conscious, ask questions to get more 
information.
 ■ Look for any containers and take them with you to the 
telephone.
 ■ Call the National Poison Control Center Hotline at 
1-800 222-1222.
 ■ Follow the directions of the Poison Control Center.
If the person becomes violent or threatening, move to 
safety and wait for help to arrive. Do not give the person 
anything to eat or drink unless medical professionals 
tell you to do so. If you do not know what the poison 
was and the person vomits, save some of the vomit. 
The hospital may analyze it to identify the poison.
 

--- Page 90 ---
78  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
FOCUS ON PREVENTION
POISONING
Use common sense when handling substances that 
could be harmful, such as chemicals and cleaners. 
Use them in a well-ventilated area. Wear protective 
clothing, such as gloves and a facemask.
Use common sense with your own medications. 
Read the product information and use only as 
directed. Ask your health care provider or pharmacist 
about the intended effects, side effects and possible 
interactions with other medications that you are 
taking. Never use another person’s prescribed 
medications. What is right for one person often is 
wrong for another. 
Always keep medications in their original containers. 
Make sure that this container is well marked with 
the original pharmacy labeling. If taking several 
medications, always check the label to ensure 
that you are taking the correct medication, and 
be especially aware of possible adverse drug 
interactions.
Over time, expired medications can become less 
effective and even toxic to humans if consumed. 
Dispose of out-of-date or unused medications 
properly by following the guidelines below.
Most medications should be thrown away in the 
household trash and not ﬂ ushed down the toilet. 
Follow these steps to maintain safety and protect 
the environment from unnecessary exposure to 
medications: 
1.  Pour the medication out of its original container 
into a sealable plastic bag.
2.  Mix the medication with something that will 
hide the medication or make it unpleasant (e.g., 
coffee grounds or kitty litter). 
3. Seal the plastic bag.
4.  Throw the plastic bag into your household 
trash.
5.  Remove and destroy all personal 
information and medication information 
(prescription label) from the medication 
container. Recycle or throw away the 
medication container.
Another option is to check if your state or local 
community has a community-based household 
hazardous waste collection program. You may be 
able to take your expired and unused medications to 
your pharmacy or another location for disposal. 
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 
website maintains a list of some of the medications 
that should be ﬂ ushed down the toilet. These 
medications are especially dangerous to humans 
and pets. One dose could cause death if taken by 
someone other than the person for whom it was 
prescribed. Flushing these medications avoids any 
chance that children or pets would ingest them 
accidentally. 
According to the FDA, any possible risk to people 
and the environment from ﬂ ushing these few 
medications is small. The FDA maintains that the 
risk is outweighed by the possibility of someone 
accidentally ingesting these medications, which 
could be life threatening. 
Preventing Poisoning in Children 
Many substances found in or around the house 
are poisonous. Children younger than 3 years and 
infants that are able to crawl are especially likely to 
be poisoned because of their curious nature, and 
because they explore their world through touching 
and tasting things around them (Fig. 5-5). If you care 
for or are near young children, be warned: it only 
takes a moment for a small child to get into trouble. 
(Continued )
FIGURE 5-5 Always supervise young children closely, 
especially in areas where common, but poisonous, household 
items are stored.
 

--- Page 91 ---
  CHAPTER  5    |    Sudden Illness 79
FOCUS ON PREPAREDNESS
POISON CONTROL CENTERS
There are 60 regional PCCs across the United 
States. These centers are dedicated to helping 
people deal with poisons. Medical professionals staff 
PCCs. These professionals give free, 24-hour advice 
to callers. PCC staff have access to information 
about most poisonous substances. They also can 
tell you what to do if a poisoning happened or is 
suspected. 
If you think a person has been poisoned and the 
person is conscious, call the National Poison Control 
Center hotline at 1-800-222-1222 ﬁ rst. When you 
call this number,  your call is automatically routed 
to your regional PCC based on the area code 
from which you called. The regional PCC staff 
then will tell you what care to give. They also will 
tell you whether you should call 9-1-1 or the local 
emergency number.
In 2008, PCCs answered over 2.4 million calls 
about poisonings. In over 70 percent of the cases, 
the caller was able to get the help needed without 
having to call 9-1-1 or the local emergency number, 
or go to the hospital or health care provider. PCCs 
help reduce the workload of the EMS personnel and 
safely reduce the number of emergency room visits. 
Be prepared: Keep the telephone number of the 
National Poison Control Center hotline posted by 
every telephone in your home or ofﬁ ce!
FOCUS ON PREVENTION (Continued )
Most child poisonings take place when a parent or 
guardian is watching a child.
Follow these guidelines to guard against poisoning 
emergencies in children: 
 ■ Always supervise children closely, especially 
in areas where poisons are commonly stored, 
such as kitchens, bathrooms and garages.
 ■ Keep children out of your work area when you 
are using potentially harmful substances. 
 ■ Consider all household or drugstore products 
to be potentially harmful.
 ■ Read all labels of products you use in your 
home. Look for these words on bottles 
and packages: “Caution,” “Warning,” 
“Poison,” “Danger” or “Keep Out of Reach 
of Children. ” 
 ■ Be careful when using and storing household 
products with fruit shown on the labels. 
Children may think that they are okay 
to drink.
 ■ Remove all medications and medical supplies 
from bags, purses, pockets, shelves, unlocked 
cabinets and drawers. 
 ■ Keep all medications, medical supplies and 
household products locked away, well out of 
the reach of children and away from food and 
drinks. 
 ■ Install special child safety locks to keep 
children from opening cabinets.
 ■ Use childproof safety caps on all medications, 
chemicals and cleaning products.
 ■ Never call medicine “candy” to get a child to 
take it, even if it has a pleasant candy ﬂ avor.
 ■ Keep products in their original containers with 
the original labels in place.
 ■ Use poison symbols to identify dangerous 
substances and teach children the meaning of 
the symbols.
 ■ Dispose of outdated or unused medications 
and household products as recommended (see 
above for appropriate disposal of medications). 
 

--- Page 92 ---
80  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
Special Care Considerations
Toxic Fumes 
It is often difﬁ cult to tell if a poisoning victim has 
inhaled toxic fumes. Toxic fumes come from a variety of 
sources. They may have an odor or be odor-free. When 
someone breathes in toxic fumes, the person’s skin may 
turn pale or ashen, which indicates a lack of oxygen. 
If it is safe for you to do so, get the person to fresh air. 
Anyone who has inhaled toxic fumes needs fresh air as 
soon as possible.
Chemicals
In the case of poisoning with dry chemicals, such as lime, 
brush off the dry chemicals with gloved hands or a cloth. 
Carefully remove any contaminated clothing but avoid 
contaminating yourself or others. Then ﬂ  ush the area 
thoroughly with large amounts of water. Be careful not 
to get any of the chemicals in your eyes or the eyes of the 
person or of bystanders.
If the poisoning resulted from wet chemicals coming 
into contact with the skin, ﬂ ush the affected area with 
large amounts of cool water (Fig. 5-6). Have someone 
else call 9-1-1 or the local emergency number. Keep 
ﬂ ushing the area until EMS personnel arrive.
Substance Abuse
People in our society abuse numerous drugs and other 
substances. This substance abuse causes a wide range of 
psychological and physical effects. 
What to Look For
Signals of possible substance abuse include:
 ■ Behavioral changes not otherwise explained.
 ■ Sudden mood changes.
 ■ Restlessness, talkativeness or irritability.
 ■ Changes in consciousness, including loss of 
consciousness.
 ■ Slurred speech or poor coordination.
 ■ Moist or ﬂ ushed skin.
 ■ Chills, nausea or vomiting.
 ■ Dizziness or confusion.
 ■ Irregular pulse.
 ■ Abnormal breathing.
When to Call 9-1-1
Call 9-1-1 or the local emergency number if the person:
 ■ Is unconscious, confused or seems to be losing 
consciousness.
 ■ Has trouble breathing or is breathing irregularly.
 ■ Has persistent chest pain or pressure.
 ■ Has pain or pressure in the abdomen that does 
not go away.
 ■ Is vomiting blood or passing blood.
 ■ Has a seizure, severe headache or slurred speech. 
 ■ Acts violently.
Also call 9-1-1 or the local emergency number if you 
are unsure what to do or you are unsure about the 
seriousness of the problem.
What to Do Until Help Arrives
If you think that a person took an overdose or has 
another substance abuse problem requiring medical 
attention or other professional help, you should check 
the scene for safety and check the person. If you have 
good reason to suspect that a substance was taken, 
call the National Poison Control Center Hotline at 
1-800-222-1222 and follow the call taker’s directions. 
In general, to care for the person, you should:
 ■ Try to learn from others what substances may have 
been taken.
 ■ Calm and reassure the person.
 ■ Keep the person from getting chilled or overheated to 
minimize shock.
PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER
When a person becomes ill suddenly, it can be 
frightening to that person, to you and to other 
bystanders. It may be difﬁ cult to determine what is 
causing the sudden illness, and you might not know 
what care to give. However, if you have learned the 
general signals as well as the signals of speciﬁ c sudden 
illnesses, you can give care conﬁ dently and quickly. 
FIGURE 5-6 If poisons such as wet chemicals get on the skin, ﬂ ush 
the affected area with large amounts of cool water.
 

--- Page 93 ---
  CHAPTER  6    |    Environmental Emergencies  81
Environmental Emergencies
D
isease, illness and injury are not the only causes of medical emergencies. Much of our environment appears to 
be relatively harmless. A weekend outing can bring you closer to the joys of nature: animals, mountains, rivers, 
blue skies. But it also can expose you to disease-carrying insects, other biting or stinging creatures and rapid 
changes in the weather. Whereas many environmental emergencies can be avoided, even with the best prevention 
efforts, emergencies do occur. 
In this chapter you will discover how to prevent heat-related illnesses and cold-related emergencies, as well as bites and 
stings from insects, spiders and other animals. You also will ﬁ  nd information on how to avoid contact with poisonous 
plants and how to avoid being struck by lightning. In addition, you will read about when to call for help and how to give 
care until help arrives.
CHAPTER   6
 

--- Page 94 ---
82  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
HEAT-RELATED ILLNESSES 
AND COLD-RELATED 
 EMERGENCIES
Exposure to extreme heat or cold can make a person 
seriously ill. The likelihood of illness also depends 
on factors such as physical activity, clothing, wind, 
humidity, working and living conditions, and a person’s 
age and state of mind (Fig. 6-1).
Once the signals of a heat-related illness or cold-related 
emergency begin to appear, a person’s condition can 
quickly worsen. A heat-related illness or cold-related 
emergency can result in death. If you see any of the 
signals, act quickly.
People at risk for heat-related illness or a cold-related 
emergency include those who work or exercise outdoors, 
elderly people, young children and people with health 
problems. Also at risk are those who have had a 
heat-related illness or cold-related emergency in the 
past, those with medical conditions that cause poor 
blood circulation and those who take medications to 
eliminate water from the body (diuretics).
People usually try to get out of extreme heat or cold 
before they begin to feel ill. However, some people do 
not or cannot. Athletes and those who work outdoors 
often keep working even after they begin to feel ill. 
People living in buildings with poor ventilation, poor 
insulation or poor heating or cooling systems are at 
increased risk of heat-related illnesses or cold-related 
emergencies. Often they might not even recognize that 
they are in danger of becoming ill.
Heat-Related Illness
Heat cramps, heat exhaustion and heat stroke are 
conditions caused by overexposure to heat, loss of 
ﬂ uids and electrolytes.
Heat Cramps
Heat cramps are the least severe of the heat-related 
illnesses. They often are the ﬁ rst signals that the body 
is having trouble with the heat. 
What to Look For
Heat cramps are painful muscle spasms. They usually 
occur in the legs and abdomen. Think of them as a 
warning of a possible heat-related illness.
What to Do
To care for heat cramps, help the person move to 
a cool place to rest. Give an electrolyte- and 
carbohydrate-containing ﬂ uid such as a commercial 
sports drink, fruit juice or milk. Water also may be 
given. Lightly stretch the muscle and gently massage 
the area (Fig. 6-2). The person should not take salt 
tablets. They can worsen the situation.
When cramps stop, the person usually can start activity 
again if there are no other signals of illness. He or she 
should keep drinking plenty of ﬂ uids. Watch the person 
carefully for further signals of heat-related illness.
FIGURE 6-1 Exposure to extreme heat or cold can make a person seriously ill.
FIGURE 6-2 Lightly stretching the muscle and gently massaging the 
area, along with having the person rest and giving electrolyte- and 
carbohydrate-containing ﬂ  uids, usually is enough for the body to 
recover from heat cramps.
9˚
-9˚
32˚
 

--- Page 95 ---
  CHAPTER  6    |    Environmental Emergencies  83
Heat Exhaustion
Heat exhaustion is a more severe condition than heat 
cramps. It often affects athletes, ﬁ reﬁ  ghters, construction 
workers and factory workers. It also affects those who 
wear heavy clothing in a hot, humid environment. 
What to Look For
Signals of heat exhaustion include cool, moist, pale, 
ashen or ﬂ ushed skin; headache; nausea; dizziness; 
weakness; and exhaustion.
What to Do 
When a heat-related illness is recognized in its early 
stages, it usually can be reversed. Get the person out of 
the heat. Move the person to a cooler environment with 
circulating air. Loosen or remove as much clothing as 
possible and apply cool, wet cloths, such as towels or 
sheets, taking care to remoisten the cloths periodically 
(Fig. 6-3). Spraying the person with water and fanning 
also can help. 
If the person is conscious and able to swallow, give 
him or her small amounts of a cool ﬂ uid such as 
a commercial sports drink or fruit juice to restore 
ﬂ uids and electrolytes. Milk or water also may be given. 
Do not let the conscious person drink too quickly. 
Give about 4 ounces of ﬂ uid every 15 minutes. Let the 
person rest in a comfortable position and watch carefully 
for changes in his or her condition. The person should 
not resume normal activities the same day.
If the person’s condition does not improve or he or she 
refuses ﬂ uids, has a change in consciousness or vomits, 
call 9-1-1 or the local emergency number, as these are 
indications that the person’s condition is getting worse. 
Stop giving ﬂ uids and place the person on his or her side 
to keep the airway open. Watch for signals of breathing 
problems. Keep the person lying down and continue 
to cool the body any way you can (see What to Do Until 
Help Arrives).
Heat Stroke
Heat stroke is the least common but most severe 
heat-related illness. It usually occurs when people 
ignore the signals of heat exhaustion. Heat stroke 
develops when the body systems are overwhelmed 
by heat and begin to stop functioning. Heat stroke 
is a serious medical emergency. 
What to Look For
Signals of heat stroke include extremely high body 
temperature, red skin that can be either dry or 
moist; changes in consciousness; rapid, weak pulse; 
rapid, shallow breathing; confusion; vomiting; 
and seizures.
When to Call 9-1-1
Call 9-1-1 or the local emergency number immediately. 
Heat stroke is a life-threatening emergency.
What to Do Until Help Arrives
 ■ Preferred method: Rapidly cool the body by 
immersing the person up to the neck in cold water, 
if possible. 
OR
Douse or spray the person with cold water.
 ■ Sponge the person with ice water-doused towels 
over the entire body, frequently rotating the cold,  
wet towels.
 ■ Cover with bags of ice.
 ■ If you are not able to measure and monitor the 
person’s temperature, apply rapid cooling methods for 
20 minutes or until the person’s condition improves.
 ■ Give care according for other conditions found. 
Cold-Related Emergencies
Frostbite and hypothermia are two types of cold-
related emergencies.
Frostbite
Frostbite is the freezing of body parts exposed to the 
cold. Severity depends on the air temperature, length 
of exposure and the wind. Frostbite can result in the 
loss of ﬁ  ngers, hands, arms, toes, feet and legs.
What to Look For
The signals of frostbite include lack of feeling in the 
affected area, swelling and skin that appears waxy, is 
cold to the touch or is discolored (ﬂ  ushed, white, yellow 
or blue). In more serious cases, blisters may form and 
the affected part may turn black and show signs of deep 
tissue damage.
FIGURE 6-3 When you recognize a heat-related illness, get the 
person out of the heat, loosen or remove clothing and apply cool, wet 
cloths, such as towels or sheets. Spraying the person with water and 
fanning also can be effective.
 

--- Page 96 ---
84  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
When to Call 9-1-1
Call 9-1-1 or the local emergency number for more 
serious frostbite or seek emergency medical help as soon 
as possible. 
What to Do Until Help Arrives
To care for frostbite, handle the area gently. Remove 
wet clothing and jewelry, if possible, from the affected 
area. Never rub a frostbitten area. Rubbing causes 
further damage to soft tissues. Do not attempt to 
rewarm the frostbitten area if there is a chance that it 
might refreeze or if you are close to a medical facility. 
For minor frostbite, rapidly rewarm the affected part 
using skin-to-skin contact such as with a warm hand. 
To care for a more serious injury, gently soak it in water 
not warmer than about 105° F (Fig. 6-4, A). If you do not 
have a thermometer, test the water temperature yourself. 
If the temperature is uncomfortable to your touch, it is 
too warm. Keep the frostbitten part in the water until 
normal color returns and it feels warm (20 to 30 minutes). 
Loosely bandage the area with a dry, sterile dressing 
(Fig. 6-4, B). If ﬁ  ngers or toes are frostbitten, place 
cotton or gauze between them. Do not break any blisters. 
Take precautions to prevent hypothermia. Monitor the 
person’s condition, and if you see that the person is going 
into shock, give care accordingly. Do not give ibuprofen 
or other nonsteroidal anti-inﬂ  ammatory drugs (NSAIDs) 
when caring for frostbite. 
Hypothermia
In a hypothermic condition, the entire body cools 
because its ability to keep warm is failing. The person 
will die if not given the proper care. 
The air temperature does not have to be below 
freezing for people to develop hypothermia. This is 
especially true if the person is wet or if it is windy. 
Elderly people in poorly heated homes can develop 
hypothermia. The homeless, the ill and young 
children also are at risk. 
Certain conditions can more easily lead to hypothermia, 
including:
 ■ Ingestion of substances that interfere with the body’s 
ability to regulate temperature (such as alcohol, other 
drugs and certain medications).
 ■ Any medical condition that impairs circulation, such 
as diabetes or cardiovascular disease.
 ■ Prolonged exposure to cold, wet and/or windy 
conditions or wet clothing. 
What to Look For
Signals of hypothermia include the following:
 ■ Shivering
 ■ Numbness
 ■ Glassy stare
 ■ Indifference
 ■ Loss of consciousness
Shivering that stops without rewarming is a sign that 
the person’s condition is worsening. He or she needs 
immediate medical care.
When to Call 9-1-1
Call 9-1-1 or the local emergency number immediately 
for any case of hypothermia. 
FIGURE 6-4, A–B To care for more serious frostbite: A, Warm the area gently by soaking the affected part in water not warmer than 105˚ F. Keep the 
frostbitten part in the water until normal color returns and it feels warm (20–30 minutes). B, Loosely bandage the area with a dry, sterile dressing.
100 - 105 °F
A B
 

--- Page 97 ---
  CHAPTER  6    |    Environmental Emergencies  85
What to Do Until Help Arrives
To care for hypothermia, start by caring for life-threatening 
conditions (see below). Make the person comfortable. 
Gently move the person to a warm place. Remove wet 
clothing and dry the person. Put on dry clothing. Warm the 
body gradually by wrapping the person in blankets and 
plastic sheeting to hold in body heat (Fig. 6-5). Also, keep 
the head covered to further retain body heat. 
If you are far from medical care, position the person 
near a heat source or apply heat pads or other heat 
sources to the body, such as containers ﬁ lled with 
warm water. Carefully monitor any heat source to 
avoid burning the person. Keep a barrier, such as a 
blanket, towel or clothing, between the heat source 
and the person. 
If the person is alert, give warm liquids that do not 
contain alcohol or caffeine. Alcohol can cause heat 
loss and caffeine can cause dehydration. Do not 
warm the person too quickly, such as by immersing 
the person in warm water. Check breathing and 
monitor for any changes in the person’s condition and 
care for shock.
In cases of severe hypothermia, the person may be 
unconscious. Breathing may have slowed or stopped. 
The body may feel stiff because the muscles became 
rigid. Check for breathing for no more than 10 seconds. 
If the person is not breathing, perform CPR. Continue 
to warm the person until emergency medical services 
(EMS) personnel take over. Be prepared to use an 
automated external deﬁ  brillator (AED), if available.
Preventing Heat-Related Illnesses 
and Cold-Related Emergencies
In general, you can prevent illnesses caused by 
overexposure to extreme temperatures. To prevent 
heat-related illnesses and cold-related emergencies, 
follow these guidelines: 
 ■ Do not go outdoors during the hottest or coldest 
part of the day.
 ■ Change your activity level according to the temperature.
 ■ Take frequent breaks.
 ■ Dress appropriately for the environment.
 ■ Drink large amounts of ﬂ uids.
BITES AND STINGS
People are bitten and stung every day by insects, spiders, 
snakes, animals and marine life. Most of the time, 
these bites and stings do not cause serious problems. 
However, in rare circumstances, certain bites and stings 
can cause serious illness or even death in people who are 
sensitive to the venom. 
Insect Stings
Most of the time, insect stings are harmless. If the 
person is allergic, an insect sting can lead to anaphylaxis, 
a life-threatening condition. 
What to Look For
Signals of an insect sting include:
 ■ Presence of a stinger.
 ■ Pain.
 ■ Swelling.
 ■ Signals of an allergic reaction.
What to Do
If someone is stung by an insect:
 ■ Remove any visible stinger. Scrape it away from the skin 
with a clean ﬁ  ngernail or a plastic card, such as a credit 
card, or use tweezers (Fig. 6-6). In the case of a bee sting, 
if you use tweezers, grasp the stinger, not the venom sac. 
 ■ Wash the site with soap and water. 
 ■ Cover the site and keep it clean.
 ■ Apply a cold pack to the area to reduce pain and swelling. 
 ■ Call 9-1-1 if the person has any trouble breathing 
or for any other signals of anaphylaxis.
Tick-Borne Diseases
Humans can get very sick from the bite of an infected 
tick. Some of the diseases spread by ticks include Rocky 
Mountain spotted fever, Babesia infection, ehrlichiosis 
and Lyme disease.
FIGURE 6-5 For hypothermia, warm the body 
gradually by wrapping the person in blankets or 
putting on dry clothing and moving him or her to a 
warm place. Courtesy of Canadian Red Cross.
 

--- Page 98 ---
86  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever
Rocky Mountain spotted fever is a bacterial 
infection spread by wood ticks in the western 
United States, dog ticks in the eastern United 
States, and other ticks in the southern United 
States. Rocky Mountain spotted fever occurs 
mostly in the spring and summer, and most 
cases occur in children. 
What to Look For
Signals of Rocky Mountain spotted fever 
usually appear between 2 and 14 days after a 
tick bite. 
Initial signals of Rocky Mountain spotted 
fever include the following:
 ■ Fever
 ■ Nausea
FIGURE 6-6 If someone is stung by an insect, scrape the stinger away from the skin 
with a clean ﬁ  ngernail or a plastic card, such as a credit card. 
FOCUS ON PREVENTION
LAYER YOUR WAY TO WARMTH
As long as seasonal changes and cold climates 
exist, preventing cold-related emergencies, such 
as hypothermia, remains important when we work 
or play outside.
The best way to ensure your comfort and 
warmth outdoors is to layer your clothing. 
The ﬁ rst layer, called the base layer, is next to 
your skin. The base layer helps to regulate your 
body temperature by moving perspiration away 
from your skin. This is important because if 
perspiration gets trapped inside your clothes, 
you can become chilled rapidly, which can lead 
to hypothermia.
Thermal underwear makes a good base layer for 
cold weather. The fabrics that are best at moving 
sweat away from the skin (also called wicking) are 
silk, merino wool and certain synthetics. Cotton is 
not a good choice because it traps moisture rather 
than wicking it away.
The job of the middle layer is insulation. 
This layer keeps you warm; it helps you retain 
heat by trapping air close to your body. Natural 
ﬁ bers, such as wool and goose down, are excellent 
insulators. So is synthetic ﬂ eece. Vests, jackets and 
tights are examples of clothing that can be worn 
for insulation.
The shell or outer layer protects you from wind, 
rain or snow. For cold weather, the shell layer 
should be both waterproof and “breathable. ” 
This will keep wind and water from getting inside 
of the other two layers while allowing perspiration 
to evaporate. The shell also should be roomy enough 
to ﬁ t easily over the other layers without restricting 
your movement.
One of the other advantages of layering is that you 
can make quick adjustments if the weather changes 
or you change your activity level. You can take 
clothes off when you become too warm and put 
them back on if you get cold.
In addition to layering your clothes, to stay warm in 
cold weather you also should wear:
 ■ A hat.
 ■ A scarf or knit mask that covers your face 
and mouth.
 ■ Sleeves that are snug at the wrist.
 ■ Mittens (they are warmer than gloves).
 ■ Water-resistant boots.
 

--- Page 99 ---
  CHAPTER  6    |    Environmental Emergencies  87
 ■ Vomiting
 ■ Muscle aches or pain
 ■ Lack of appetite
 ■ Severe headache
Later signals include:
 ■ Rash: The spotted rash usually starts a few days after 
fever develops. It ﬁ rst appears as small spots on the 
wrists and ankles. It then spreads to the rest of the 
body. However, about one-third of persons infected 
with the illness do not get a rash.
 ■ Abdominal pain.
 ■ Joint pain.
 ■ Diarrhea.
When to Seek Medical Care
Call a health care provider if the person develops 
signals of Rocky Mountain spotted fever after a tick bite. 
The health care provider is likely to prescribe antibiotics. 
In most cases, the person will recover fully. If left 
untreated, complications of Rocky Mountain spotted 
fever can be life threatening. 
Babesia Infection
Babesia also called Babesiosis is a protozoa infection 
spread by deer ticks and black-legged ticks. It is more 
common during warm months, and most cases happen 
in the northeast and upper Midwest regions of the 
United States.
What to Look For
Many people infected with Babesia have no apparent 
symptoms. Some people may have ﬂ u-like symptoms, 
such as: 
 ■ Fever
 ■ Sweats
 ■ Chills
 ■ Body aches and headaches
 ■ No appetite
 ■ Nausea
 ■ Fatigue
Others infected with Babesia develop a type of anemia 
that can cause jaundice and dark urine. In some people, 
the disease can be life threatening if untreated. The elderly 
and persons with no spleen, a weak immune system or a 
serious health condition are the most susceptible.
When to Seek Medical Care
If a person develops any of the signals described above, 
he or she should seek medical care. Most people with 
signals of the disease can be treated successfully with 
prescription medications.
Ehrlichiosis
Most cases of infection with the bacteria ehrlichia in 
humans are caused by bites by an infected Lone Star 
tick, and occur mainly in the southern, eastern and 
south-central United States. 
What to Look For 
Many people with ehrlichiosis do not become ill. 
Some develop only mild signals that are seen 
5 to 10 days after an infected tick bit the person. 
Initial signals include the following:
 ■ Fever
 ■ Headache
 ■ Fatigue
 ■ Muscle aches
Other signals that may develop include the following:
 ■ Nausea
 ■ Vomiting
 ■ Diarrhea
 ■ Cough
 ■ Joint pains
 ■ Confusion
 ■ Rash (in some cases)
When to Seek Medical Care
If the person becomes ill with any of the above 
signals described, he or she should seek medical 
care. Ehrlichiosis is treated with antibiotics. 
Lyme Disease
Lyme disease is spreading throughout the United States. 
Although it is most prevalent on the east coast and 
the upper Midwest, cases of Lyme disease have been 
reported in all 50 states. 
Lyme disease is spread by the deer tick and black-legged 
tick, which attaches itself to ﬁ eld mice and deer. Deer 
ticks are tiny and difﬁ cult to see (Fig. 6-7). They are 
much smaller than the common dog tick or wood tick. 
They can be as small as a poppy seed or the head of a 
pin. Adult deer ticks are only as large as a grape seed. 
Because of the tick’s tiny size, its bite usually is painless. 
Many people who develop Lyme disease cannot recall 
having been bitten.
The tick is found around branches and in wooded 
and grassy areas. Like all ticks, it attaches itself to any 
warm-blooded animal with which it comes into direct 
contact, including humans. Deer ticks are active 
any time the temperature is above about 45
° F. 
However, most cases of infection happen between 
May and late August, when ticks are most active and 
 

--- Page 100 ---
88  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
people spend more time outdoors. Recent studies 
indicate that the tick must remain embedded in human 
skin for about 36 to 48 hours to transmit the disease. 
More information on Lyme disease may be available 
from your local or state health department, the 
American Lyme Disease Foundation (aldf.com), or the 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) 
(cdc.gov/features/lymedisease/).
What to Look For 
The ﬁ rst signal of infection may appear a few days 
or a few weeks after a tick bite. In 80 to 90 percent 
of all cases of Lyme disease, a rash starts as a small 
red area at the site of the bite. It may spread up to 
7 inches across (Fig. 6-8). In fair-skinned people, 
the center may be a lighter color with the outer edges 
red and raised. This sometimes gives the rash a 
bull’s-eye appearance. In some individuals, the 
rash may appear to be solid red. In dark-skinned 
people, the area may look black and blue, like a bruise. 
The rash may or may not be warm to the touch and 
usually is not itchy or painful. If a rash does appear, 
it will do so in about 1 to 2 weeks and may last for about 
3 to 5 weeks. Some people with Lyme disease never 
develop a rash. 
Other signals of Lyme disease include fever, headache, 
weakness, and joint and muscle pain. These signals 
are similar to signals of ﬂ u and can develop slowly. 
They might not occur at the same time as the rash. 
Lyme disease can get worse if it is not treated. 
Signals can include severe fatigue; fever; a stiff, 
aching neck; tingling or numbness in the ﬁ ngers and 
toes; and facial paralysis. 
In its advanced stages Lyme disease may cause 
painful arthritis; numbness in the arms, hands 
or legs; severe headaches; long- or short-term 
memory loss; confusion; dizziness; and problems 
in seeing or hearing. Some of these signals could 
indicate problems with the brain or nervous system. 
Lyme disease may also cause heart problems such as 
an irregular or rapid heartbeat.
When to Seek Medical Care
If rash or ﬂ u-like signals develop, the person should 
seek medical care immediately. A health care provider 
usually will prescribe antibiotics to treat Lyme disease. 
Antibiotics work quickly and effectively if taken as soon 
as possible. Most people who get treated early make 
a full recovery. If you suspect Lyme disease, do not delay 
seeking treatment. Treatment time is longer and less 
effective when the person has been infected for a long 
period of time. 
Preventing Tick-borne Diseases
Follow the guidelines presented in Focus on 
Prevention: How to Beat Those Little Critters in 
this chapter for general tips on how to prevent contact 
with, and bites from, ticks when you are in wooded 
or grassy areas.
To prevent tick-borne illnesses, always check for ticks 
immediately after outdoor activities. Most experts 
believe that the longer the tick stays attached to the skin, 
the greater the chances are of infection. Therefore, check 
for ticks at least once daily after having been outdoors. 
Quickly remove any ticks that you ﬁ nd before they 
become swollen with blood. 
Wash all clothing. Be sure to check pets because they can 
carry ticks into the house, where they can then attach 
themselves to people or other pets. Pets also can develop 
signals of tick-borne diseases. 
If you ﬁ  nd a tick embedded in a person’s skin, it must 
be removed. With a gloved hand, grasp the tick with 
ﬁ ne-tipped and pointed tweezer that has a smooth inside 
FIGURE 6-7 Deer ticks are tiny and difﬁ  cult to see. © iStockphoto
.com/Martin Pietak.
FIGURE 6-8 A person with Lyme disease may develop a rash. 
© iStockphoto.com/Heike Kampe.
 

--- Page 101 ---
  CHAPTER  6    |    Environmental Emergencies  89
surface. Get as close to the skin as possible. Pull slowly, 
steadily and ﬁ  rmly with no twisting (Fig. 6-9).
 ■ Do not try to burn off the tick.
 ■ Do not apply petroleum jelly or nail polish 
to the tick. 
Put the tick in a container or jar with rubbing alcohol 
to kill it. Clean the bite area with soap and water and an 
antiseptic. Apply an antibiotic ointment if it is available 
and the person has no known allergies or sensitivities to 
the medication. Encourage the person to seek medical 
advice because of the risk of contracting a tick-borne 
disease. If you cannot remove the tick, have the person 
seek advanced medical care. 
Mosquito-Borne Illness: 
West Nile Virus
West Nile virus (WNV) is passed on to humans 
and other animals by mosquitoes that bite them after 
feeding on infected birds. Recently, WNV has been 
reported in some mild climate areas of North America 
and Europe. 
WNV cannot be passed from one person to another. 
Also, no evidence supports that humans can acquire 
the disease by handling live or dead birds infected with 
WNV. However, it is still a good idea to use disposable 
gloves when handling an infected bird. Contact your 
local health department for instructions on reporting 
and disposing of the bird’s body.
For most people, the risk of infection by WNV is very 
low. Less than 1 percent of people who are bitten 
by mosquitoes develop any signals of the disease. 
In addition, relatively few mosquitoes actually carry 
WNV. People who spend a lot of time outdoors are 
at a higher risk for catching the disease. Only about 
1 in every 150 people who are infected with WNV will 
become seriously ill. 
Preventing West Nile Virus
The easiest and best way to avoid WNV is to prevent 
mosquito bites. Speciﬁ  cally, you can:
 ■ Use insect repellents containing DEET 
(N, N-diethyl-meta-toluamide) when you 
are outdoors. Follow the directions on the 
package (see Focus on Prevention: Repelling 
Those Pests).
 ■ Consider staying indoors at dusk and dawn, when 
mosquitoes are most active. If you have to be outdoors 
during these times, use insect repellent and wear long 
sleeves and pants. Light-colored clothing can help you 
to see mosquitoes that land on you.
 ■ Make sure you have good screens on your windows 
and doors to keep mosquitoes out. 
 ■ Get rid of mosquito breeding sites by emptying 
sources of standing water outside of the home, 
such as from ﬂ owerpots, buckets and barrels. 
Also, change the water in pet dishes and replace 
the water in bird baths weekly, drill drainage holes 
in tire swings so that water drains out and keep 
children’s wading pools empty and on their sides 
when they are not being used.
For more information, visit cdc.gov/westnile or call the 
CDC public response hotline at (888) 246-2675 (English), 
(888) 246-2857 (Español) or (866) 874-2646 (TTY).
Source: CDC.gov and redcross.org
What to Look For
Most people infected with WNV have no signals. 
Approximately 20 percent develop mild signals, 
such as fever and aches, which pass on their own. 
The risk of severe disease is higher for people 50 years 
and older. 
People typically develop signals of WNV between 3 and 
14 days after an infected mosquito bites them. Signals of 
WNV include the following:
 ■ High fever
 ■ Headache
 ■ Neck stiffness 
 ■ Confusion
 ■ Coma
 ■ Tremors 
 ■ Convulsions 
 ■ Muscle weakness
 ■ Vision loss
 ■ Numbness
 ■ Paralysis
These signals may last several weeks. In some cases, 
WNV can cause fatal encephalitis, which is a swelling 
of the brain that leads to death.
FIGURE 6-9 Remove a tick by pulling slowly, steadily 
and ﬁ  rmly with ﬁ ne-tipped tweezers.
 

--- Page 102 ---
90  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
When to Seek Care
If you develop signals of severe WNV illness, such 
as unusually severe headaches or confusion, seek 
medical attention immediately. Pregnant women 
and nursing mothers are encouraged to talk to their 
doctors if they develop signals that could indicate 
WNV. There is no speciﬁ  c treatment for WNV 
infection or a vaccine to prevent it. In more severe 
cases, people usually need to go to the hospital, where 
they will receive intravenous ﬂ  uids, assistance with 
breathing and nursing care.
Spider Bites and Scorpion 
Stings 
Few spiders in the United States can cause serious 
illness or death. However, the bites of the black 
widow and brown recluse spiders can, in rare cases, 
kill a person (Fig. 6-10, A–B). Another dangerous 
spider is the northwestern brown, or hobo, 
spider. 
Widow spiders can be black, red or brown. 
The black widow spider is black with a 
reddish hourglass shape on the underside 
of its body and is the most venomous of the 
widow spiders. The brown recluse spider 
(also known as the violin or ﬁ ddleback 
spider) has a distinctive violin-shaped 
pattern on the back of its front body 
section. 
These spiders prefer dark, out-of-the-way 
places. Examples of places where these 
spiders live include wood, rock and brush 
piles; dark garages; and attics. People often 
are bitten on their arms and hands when 
reaching into these places. 
FOCUS ON PREVENTION
You can prevent bites and stings from insects, 
spiders, ticks or snakes by following these guidelines 
when you are in wooded or grassy areas:
 ■ Wear long-sleeved shirts and long pants.
 ■ Tuck your pant legs into your socks or boots.
 ■ Use a rubber band or tape to hold pants 
against socks so that nothing can get 
under clothing.
 ■ Tuck your shirt into your pants.
 ■ Wear light-colored clothing to make it easier 
to see tiny insects or ticks.
 ■ When hiking in woods and ﬁ elds, stay in 
the middle of trails. Avoid underbrush and 
tall grass.
 ■ If you are outdoors for a long time, check 
yourself several times during the day. 
Especially check in hairy areas of the body 
like the back of the neck and the scalp line.
 ■ Inspect yourself carefully for insects or 
ticks after being outdoors or have someone 
else do it.
 ■ Avoid walking in areas where snakes are 
known to live.
 ■ If you encounter a snake, look around for 
others. Turn around and walk away on the 
same path on which you came.
 ■ Wear sturdy hiking boots.
 ■ If you have pets that go outdoors, spray 
them with repellent made for that type of pet. 
Apply the repellent according to the label and 
check your pet for ticks often.
 ■ If you will be in a grassy or wooded area 
for a long time or if you know that the 
area is highly infested with insects or ticks, 
consider using a repellent. Follow the 
directions carefully.
HOW TO BEAT THOSE LITTLE CRITTERS
FIGURE 6-10, A–B Bites from A, the black widow spider and B, the brown recluse 
spider can make a person very sick. Fig. A © iStockphoto.com/Mark Kostich, 
Fig. B Image © Miles Boyer, 2010, Used under license from Shutterstock.com.
A B
 

--- Page 103 ---
  CHAPTER  6    |    Environmental Emergencies  91
FIGURE 6-11 A scorpion. © iStockphoto.com/John Bell.
FOCUS ON PREVENTION
REPELLING THOSE PESTS
Insect repellent is used to keep away pests such as 
mosquitoes and ticks that sting and bite. DEET is 
the active ingredient in many insect repellents. Insect 
repellents that contain DEET are available in many 
different forms, including sprays, lotions and liquids. 
Using repellent with DEET is safe for most people. 
However, it is important to follow label directions 
and take proper precautions (see below).
The amount of DEET in insect repellents ranges 
from less than 10 percent to over 30 percent. 
The more DEET that a product contains, the 
longer it will protect from mosquito and tick bites. 
For example, an insect repellent containing about 
24 percent DEET provides about 5 hours of 
protection. 
Products with 10 percent DEET are as safe 
as products with 30 percent DEET when used 
properly. Precautions to follow when using products 
containing DEET include:
 ■ Apply products that contain DEET only once 
a day. 
 ■ Do not use DEET on infants under 2 months 
of age. 
 ■ Do not use a product that combines sunscreen 
with a DEET-containing insect repellent. 
Sunscreens wash off and need to be 
reapplied often. DEET does not wash off with 
water. Repeating applications may increase 
absorption of the chemical and cause possible 
toxic effects. 
Before using insect repellent, check the label 
carefully for the list of ingredients. If you are unsure 
whether the product is safe for you and your family 
to use, ask your health care provider. Use caution 
when considering insect repellents to be used by 
pregnant women, infants and children.
If you use a repellent, follow these general rules: 
 ■ Keep all repellents out of the reach of children.
 ■ To apply repellent to the face, ﬁ rst spray it on 
your hands and then apply it from your hands 
to your face. Avoid sensitive areas, such as the 
lips and eyes.
 ■ Never use repellents on an open wound or 
irritated skin.
 ■ Use repellents sparingly. One application will 
last 4 to 8 hours. Heavier or more frequent 
applications do not increase effectiveness.
 ■ If you suspect that you are having a reaction to 
a repellent, wash the treated skin immediately 
and call your health care provider.
 ■ Never put repellents on children’s hands. 
They may put them in their eyes or mouth.
For current information about pesticides, contact the 
National Pesticide Information Center at npic.orst.
edu or at (800) 858-7378.
Scorpions live in dry regions such as the southwestern 
United States and Mexico. They live under rocks, 
logs and the bark of certain trees (Fig. 6-11). They are 
most active at night. Like spiders, only a few species 
of scorpions have a sting that can cause death. It is 
difﬁ cult to distinguish highly poisonous scorpions from 
nonpoisonous scorpions. Therefore, all scorpion stings 
should be treated as medical emergencies. 
What to Look For
Signals of spider bites depend on the amount of poison, 
called venom, injected and the person’s sensitivity to 
the venom. Most spider bites heal with no adverse 
effects or scarring. Signals of venomous spider bites 
can seem identical to those of other conditions and 
therefore can be difﬁ cult to recognize. The only way 
 

--- Page 104 ---
92  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
widow spider or brown recluse spider, stung by a 
scorpion or if the person has any other life-threatening 
conditions.
What to Do Until Help Arrives
If the person has been bitten by a venomous spider 
or stung by a scorpion:
 ■ Wash the wound thoroughly.
 ■ Apply an antibiotic ointment, if the person has 
no known allergies or sensitivities to the medication, 
to prevent infection. 
 ■ Bandage the wound.
 ■ Apply an ice or cold pack to the site to reduce pain 
and swelling. 
 ■ Encourage the person to seek medical attention. 
Children and older adults may need antivenin to 
block the effects of the spider’s venom.
 ■ If you transport the person to a medical facility, 
keep the bitten area elevated and as still 
as possible. 
Venomous Snake Bites
Snakebites kill few people in the United States. Of the 
estimated 7000 people bitten annually, fewer than 
5 die (Fig. 6-12, A–D). Most snakebites occur near the 
home, not in the wild. Rattlesnakes account for most 
snakebites, and most of the deaths from snakebites in 
the United States. Most deaths occur because the bitten 
person has an allergic reaction, is in poor health or 
because too much time passes before he or she receives 
medical care.
What to Look For
Signals of a possibly venomous snakebite include: 
 ■ A bite mark.
 ■ Pain.
 ■ Swelling.
When to Call 9-1-1
If the bite is from a venomous snake such as a 
rattlesnake, copperhead, cottonmouth or coral 
snake call 9-1-1 or the local emergency number 
immediately. 
What to Do Until Help Arrives
To care for a venomous snake bite:
 ■ Wash the wound.
 ■ Apply an elastic (pressure immobilization) bandage 
to slow the spread of venom through the lymphatic 
system by following these steps:
to be certain that a spider has bitten a person is to have 
witnessed it. 
The bite of the black widow spider is the most painful 
and deadly of the widow spiders, especially in very 
young children and the elderly. The bite usually causes 
an immediate sharp pinprick pain, followed by a dull 
pain in the area of the bite. However, the person often 
does not know that he or she has been bitten until he or 
she starts to feel ill or notices a bite mark or swelling. 
Other signals of a black widow spider bite include:
 ■ Rigid muscles in the shoulders, chest, back and 
abdomen.
 ■ Restlessness.
 ■ Anxiety.
 ■ Dizziness.
 ■ Headache.
 ■ Excessive sweating.
 ■ Weakness.
 ■ Drooping or swelling of the eyelids.
The bite of the brown recluse spider may produce little 
or no pain initially. Pain in the area of the bite develops 
an hour or more later. A blood-ﬁ  lled blister forms under 
the surface of the skin, sometimes in a target or bull’s-
eye pattern. Over time, the blister increases in size and 
eventually ruptures, leading to tissue destruction and a 
black scab.
The hobo spider also can produce an open, slow-healing 
wound.
General signals of spider bites and scorpion stings 
may include:
 ■ A mark indicating a possible bite or sting.
 ■ Severe pain in the sting or bite area.
 ■ A blister, lesion or swelling at the entry site. 
 ■ Nausea and vomiting.
 ■ Stiff or painful joints. 
 ■ Chills or fever. 
 ■ Trouble breathing or swallowing or signs 
of anaphylaxis.
 ■ Sweating or salivating profusely.
 ■ Muscle aches or severe abdominal or back pain.
 ■ Dizziness or fainting. 
 ■ Chest pain.
 ■ Elevated heart rate. 
 ■ Infection at the site of the bite. 
When to Call 9-1-1
Call 9-1-1 or the local emergency number immediately 
if you suspect that someone has been bitten by a black 
 

--- Page 105 ---
  CHAPTER  6    |    Environmental Emergencies  93
 { Check for feeling, warmth and color of the 
limb and note changes in skin color and 
temperature.
 { Place the end of the bandage against the skin and 
use overlapping turns.
 { The wrap should cover a long body section, 
such as an arm or a calf, beginning at the point 
farthest from the heart. For a joint, such as the 
knee or ankle, use ﬁ  gure-eight turns to support 
the joint.
 { Check above and below the injury for feeling, 
warmth and color, especially ﬁ ngers and toes, 
after you have applied an elastic roller bandage. 
By checking before and after bandaging, you may 
be able to tell if any tingling or numbness is from 
the elastic bandage or the injury.
 { Check the snugness of the bandaging—a ﬁ nger 
should easily, but not loosely, pass under the 
bandage.
 { Keep the injured area still and lower than the 
heart. The person should walk only if absolutely 
necessary.
 ■ Do not apply ice.
 ■ Do not cut the wound. 
 ■ Do not apply suction.
 ■ Do not apply a tourniquet. 
 ■ Do not use electric shock, such as from a car battery. 
Animal Bites
The bite of a domestic or wild animal can cause infection 
and soft tissue injury. The most serious possible result 
is rabies. Rabies is transmitted through the saliva of 
diseased animals such as skunks, bats, raccoons, cats, 
dogs, cattle and foxes.
Animals with rabies may act strangely. For example, those 
that are usually active at night may be active in the daytime. 
A wild animal that usually tries to avoid people might 
not run from you. Rabid animals may drool, appear to be 
partially paralyzed, or act aggressively or strangely quiet. 
If not treated, rabies is fatal. Anyone bitten by an animal 
that might have rabies must get medical attention. 
Treatment for rabies includes a series of vaccine injections 
to build up immunity that will help ﬁ  ght the disease. 
If an animal bites someone, try to get the person away 
from the animal without putting yourself in danger. Do 
not try to stop, hold or catch the animal. Do not touch 
a pet that may have come in contact with the animal’s 
saliva without using or wearing some form of protection 
like disposable gloves. 
FIGURE 6-12, A–D Venomous snakes found in the United Statics include A, rattlesnake (Image © Audrey Snider-Bell, 2010 Used under 
license from Shutterstock.com). B, copperhead (© iStockphoto.com/Jake Holmes), C, cottonmouth (Image © Leighton Photography & 
Imaging, 2010 Used under license from Shutterstock.com), and D, coral snake (© iStockphoto.com/Mark Kostich).
A
B
A B
C D
 

--- Page 106 ---
94  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
What to Look For
Signals of an animal bite include:
 ■ A bite mark.
 ■ Bleeding.
When to Call 9-1-1
Call 9-1-1 or the local emergency number if the wound 
is bleeding seriously or you suspect the animal might 
have rabies.
If possible, try to remember the animal’s appearance 
and where you last saw it. When you call 9-1-1 or the 
local emergency number, the call taker will direct the 
proper authorities, such as animal control, to the scene.
What to Do Until Help Arrives
To care for an animal bite:
 ■ Control bleeding ﬁ rst if the wound is bleeding seriously.
 ■ Do not clean serious wounds. The wound will be 
cleaned at a medical facility. 
 ■ If bleeding is minor, wash the wound with soap and 
water then irrigate with clean running tap water.
 ■ Control any bleeding.
 ■ Apply an antibiotic ointment to a minor wound, 
if the person has no known allergies or sensitivities 
to the medication, and cover the wound with a 
dressing. 
 ■ Watch for signals of infection.
Marine Life Stings
The stings of some forms of marine life are not only 
painful, but they can make you sick, and in some 
parts of the world, can kill you (Fig. 6-13, A–D). 
The side effects include allergic reactions that can cause 
breathing and heart problems, as well as paralysis and 
death. The lifeguards in your area should know the 
types of jellyﬁ  sh that may be present.
What to Look For
Signals of marine life stings include:
 ■ Possible puncture marks.
 ■ Pain.
 ■ Swelling.
 ■ Signs of a possible allergic reaction.
B
A B
FIGURE 6-13, A–D The painful sting of some marine animals can cause serious problems: A, stingray (© iStockphoto.com/Dia Karanouh); 
B, Bluebottle jellyﬁ sh/Portuguese man-of-war (© iStockphoto.com/Mark Kostich); C, sea anemone (© iStockphoto.com/Omers); D, jellyﬁ sh (Image 
© Johan1900, 2010 Used under license from Shutterstock.com).
C D
 

--- Page 107 ---
  CHAPTER  6    |    Environmental Emergencies  95
When to Call 9-1-1
Call 9-1-1 or the local emergency number if the 
person does not know what stung him or her, has 
a history of allergic reactions to marine-life stings, 
is stung on the face or neck, or starts to have 
trouble breathing.
What to Do Until Help Arrives
If you encounter someone who has a marine-life sting:
 ■ Get a lifeguard to remove the person from the 
water as soon as possible. If a lifeguard is not 
available, use a reaching assist, if possible (see 
Chapter 1). Avoid touching the person with your 
bare hands, which could expose you to the stinging 
tentacles. Use gloves or a towel when removing 
any tentacles.
 ■ If you know the sting is from a jelly ﬁ  sh, irrigate the 
injured part with large amounts of vinegar as soon 
as possible for at least 30 seconds. This can help 
to remove the tentacles and stop the injection of 
venom. Vinegar works best to offset the toxin, but 
a baking soda slurry also may be used if vinegar is 
not available. 
 ■ If the sting is known to be from a bluebottle jellyﬁ sh, 
also known as a Portuguese man-of-war, use ocean 
water instead of vinegar. Vinegar triggers further 
envenomation.
 ■ Do not rub the wound, apply a pressure 
immobilization bandage or apply fresh water or
other remedies because this may increase pain. 
 ■ Once the stinging action is stopped and tentacles 
removed, care for pain by hot-water immersion. 
Have the person take a hot shower if possible for at 
least 20 minutes. The water temperature should be 
as hot as can be tolerated (non-scalding) or about 
113° F if the temperature can be measured. 
 ■ If you know the sting is from a stingray, sea urchin 
or spiny fish, flush the wound with tap water. 
Ocean water also may be used. Keep the injured 
part still and soak the affected area in non-scalding 
hot water (as hot as the person can stand) for at 
least 20 minutes or until the pain goes away. If 
hot water is not available, packing the area in hot 
sand may have a similar effect if the sand is hot 
enough. Then carefully clean the wound and apply 
a bandage. Watch for signals of infection and 
check with a health care provider to determine if a 
tetanus shot is needed.
POISONOUS PLANTS
Every year, millions of people suffer after coming 
into contact with poisonous plants such as poison 
ivy, poison sumac and poison oak (Fig. 6-14, A–C). 
FIGURE 6-14, A–C A, poison ivy (Image © Tim Mainiero, 2010 Used under license from Shutterstock.com); 
B, poison sumac (Courtesy of www.poison-ivy.org); C, poison oak (Image © Dwight Smith, 2010 Used under 
license from Shutterstock.com).
A
B C
 

--- Page 108 ---
96  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
You often can avoid or limit the irritating effects of 
touching or brushing against poisonous plants by 
following these steps: 
 ■ Remove exposed clothing and wash the exposed area 
thoroughly with soap and water as soon as possible 
after contact. 
 ■ Wash clothing exposed to plant oils since the oils can 
linger on fabric. Wash your hands thoroughly after 
handling exposed clothing. Wash your hands after 
touching exposed pets.
 ■ Put a paste of baking soda and water on the area 
several times a day if a rash or weeping sore begins to 
develop. Calamine lotion and antihistamines, such as 
Benadryl
®, may help to dry up the sores. 
 ■ See a health care provider if the condition gets worse 
or involves areas of the face or throat that could 
affect breathing. He or she may decide to give anti-
inﬂ ammatory drugs, such as corticosteroids or other 
medications, to relieve discomfort. 
LIGHTNING
Every year, lightning causes more deaths in the United 
States than any other weather hazard, including 
blizzards, hurricanes, ﬂ oods, tornadoes, earthquakes 
and volcanic eruptions. The National Weather Service 
(NWS) estimates that lightning kills nearly 100 people 
annually and injures about 300 others.
Lightning travels at speeds of up to 300 miles per second. 
Anything tall—a tower, tree or person—can become a 
path for the electrical current. A lightning strike can 
throw a person through the air, burn off clothes and 
cause the heart to stop beating. The most severe lightning 
strikes carry up to 50 million volts of electricity. This 
is enough electricity to light 13,000 homes. Lightning 
can “ﬂ ash” over a person’s body or it can travel through 
blood vessels and nerves to reach the ground.
If a person survives a lightning strike, he or she may 
act confused. The person may describe the episode 
as getting hit on the head or hearing an explosion.
Prevent Lightning Injuries
What to do before a possible lightning storm:
 ■ Pick campsites that meet safety precautions. 
 ■ Know local weather patterns, especially in summertime. 
 ■ Plan turnaround times (the amount of time you need 
to get back) in lightning-prone areas, based on your 
research, and stick to the plan.
During thunderstorms, use common sense to prevent 
being struck by lightning. If a thunderstorm threatens, 
the NWS advises people to:
 ■ Postpone activities immediately, and not wait 
for rain to begin. Thunder and lightning can strike 
without rain.
 ■ Watch cloud patterns and conditions for signs of an 
approaching storm.
 ■ Designate safe locations and move or 
evacuate to a safe location at the ﬁ rst sound 
of thunder. Every 5 seconds between the ﬂ ash 
of lightning and the sound of thunder equals 
1 mile of distance.
 ■ Where possible, quickly ﬁ nd shelter in a substantial 
building (not a carport, open garage or covered patio), 
or in a fully enclosed metal vehicle, such as a hardtop 
car (not a convertible), truck or van, with the windows 
completely shut.
 ■ Use the 30-30 rule where visibility is good and 
there is nothing obstructing your view of the 
thunderstorm. When you see lightning, count the 
time until you hear thunder. If that time is 
30 seconds or less, the thunderstorm is within 
6 miles. Seek shelter immediately. The threat of 
lightning continues for a much longer period than 
most people realize. Wait at least 30 minutes after 
the last clap of thunder before leaving shelter. 
If inside during a storm, keep away from windows. 
Injuries may occur from ﬂ  ying debris or glass if 
a window breaks.
 ■ Stay away from plumbing, electrical equipment and 
wiring during a thunderstorm. 
 ■ Do not use a corded telephone or radio transmitter 
except for emergencies.
 ■ If there is a tornado alert, go to the basement of the 
lowest interior level of a building. 
In a lightning storm, reach safety by following these 
guidelines:
 ■ Move downhill.
 ■ Do not stay in a meadow or any other 
wide-open space.
 ■ Seek uniform cover, such as low rolling hills or trees 
of about the same size. 
 ■ If you are boating or swimming, get to land and move 
away from the shore.
 ■ Avoid all of the following: 
 { Metal
 { Anything connected to electrical power
 { High places and high objects such as 
tall trees
 { Open places 
 { Damp, shallow caves and tunnels
 { Overhangs 
 { Flood zones 
 

--- Page 109 ---
  CHAPTER  6    |    Environmental Emergencies  97
 { Places obviously struck by lightning in the past 
 { Long conductors, such as fences 
If lightning is striking nearby when people are outside, 
they should assume a safe position:
 ■ Squat or sit in a tight body position on insulating 
material such as a sleeping pad or a life jacket (Fig. 6-15). 
 ■ Take off any metal-framed packs and toss hiking poles 
away from the group.
 ■ Do not lie down; instead, try to make as little contact 
with the ground as possible.
 ■ If you feel your hair stand on end or your skin get 
tingly, cover your ears with your hands, close your 
eyes and get your head close to your knees. 
 ■ Avoid squatting or sitting close to other people. 
Maintain a minimum distance of at least 15 feet 
between people. Keep everyone in sight if possible.
Lightning Injuries
Lightning injuries are serious and can be fatal. Being 
struck by lightning can cause cardiac and pulmonary 
arrest, neurological problems, blindness, deafness, burns, 
bone fractures, loss of hearing, eyesight and trauma.
What to Look For
When checking a person struck by lightning, look the 
person over from head to toe in the front and back for 
any of the following signals:
 ■ Unconsciousness
 ■ Dazed, confused behavior
 ■ Trouble breathing
 ■ No breathing
 ■ Burn marks on the skin or other open wounds
 ■ Muscle, bone or joint injuries such as fractures 
or dislocations
When to Call 9-1-1
Call 9-1-1 immediately if a person is struck 
by lightning. 
Even if the person seems to have recovered soon after 
the incident, advanced medical care still is necessary 
because serious problems can develop later. 
What to Do Until Help Arrives 
 ■ Immediately perform CPR if needed.
 ■ Give care for any injuries as needed including care 
for thermal burns. 
 ■ Be ready to care for other conditions, such as 
hypothermia in a wet, injured person.
PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER 
Outdoor activities in all kinds of weather are healthy 
and fun, but environmental emergencies can occur. 
Children and adults become seriously injured, and 
even die, from heat stroke, hypothermia, snakebites 
and lightning strikes.
The good news is that you can prevent environmental 
emergencies most of the time. Be prepared for all kinds 
of weather and situations before you head out to hike, 
swim, ski or camp. Know how to dress appropriately, 
what precautions to take and what to do if a situation 
becomes uncertain.
Even with excellent preparation, emergencies still 
happen. Know the signals—especially the early ones—of 
environmentally caused illnesses. This will allow you 
to make quick decisions for yourself or others. Quick 
decisions about when to call 9-1-1 and when to seek 
medical care can mean the difference between life and 
death in an environmental emergency! 
FIGURE 6-15 If lightning strikes and you cannot get inside, squat or 
sit in a tight body position, preferably on insulating material such as a 
sleeping pad or life jacket. Courtesy of the Canadian Red Cross.
 

--- Page 110 ---
98  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
Soft Tissue Injuries
S
oft tissue injuries happen to children and adults of all ages. They can be minor, serious or life threatening. 
Examples of minor soft tissue injuries include scrapes, bruises and mild sunburns. Examples of serious soft 
tissue injuries include large cuts that require stitches and partial-thickness burns. Life-threatening soft tissue 
injuries include stab wounds to the abdomen, lacerations that cause serious bleeding and full-thickness burns. 
This chapter discusses the signals of soft tissue injuries, including closed wounds, open wounds and burns. You will 
read about the differences between major wounds and minor wounds and between different types of burns. In addition, 
you will learn when to call 9-1-1 or the local emergency number and how to give care.
CHAPTER   7
 

--- Page 111 ---
  CHAPTER  7    |    Soft Tissue Injuries    99
 ■ Altered mental state, such as the person becoming 
confused, faint, drowsy or unconscious.
When to Call 9-1-1
Call 9-1-1 or the local emergency number if:
 ■ A person complains of severe pain or cannot 
move a body part without pain. 
 ■ You think the force that caused the injury was great 
enough to cause serious damage.
 ■ An injured extremity is blue or extremely pale.
 ■ The person’s abdomen is tender and distended.
 ■ The person is vomiting blood or coughing up blood.
 ■ The person shows signals of shock or becomes 
confused, drowsy or unconscious.
WOUNDS
Soft tissues are the layers of skin and the fat and muscle 
beneath the skin’s outer layer (Fig. 7-1). An injury to the 
soft tissue commonly is called a wound. Any time the soft 
tissue is damaged or torn, the body is threatened. Injuries 
may damage the soft tissue at or near the skin’s surface or 
deep in the body. Severe bleeding can occur at the skin’s 
surface or beneath, where it is harder to detect. Germs can 
enter the body through the wound and cause infection.
Wounds usually are classiﬁ  ed as either closed or open. 
In a closed wound, the skin’s surface is not broken; 
therefore, tissue damage and any bleeding occur below 
the surface. In an open wound, the skin’s surface is 
broken, and blood may come through the tear in the skin.
Fortunately, most of the bleeding you will encounter 
will not be serious. In most cases it usually stops by 
itself within a few minutes with minimal intervention. 
The trauma may cause a blood vessel to tear causing 
bleeding, but the blood at the wound site usually clots 
quickly and stops ﬂ owing. Sometimes, however, the 
damaged blood vessel is too large or the pressure in 
the blood vessel is too great for the blood to clot, then 
bleeding can be life threatening. This can happen with 
both closed and open wounds.
Closed Wounds
The simplest closed wound is a bruise. A bruise develops 
when the body is bumped or hit, such as when you bump 
your leg on a table or chair (Fig. 7-2). The force of the blow 
to the body damages the soft tissue layers beneath the skin. 
This causes internal bleeding. Blood and other ﬂ uids seep 
into the surrounding tissues, causing the 
area to swell and change color.
A more serious closed wound can 
be caused by a violent force hitting 
the body. This type of force can injure 
larger blood vessels and deeper layers 
of muscle tissue, which may result 
in heavy bleeding beneath the skin 
and damage to internal organs. 
What to Look For
Signals of internal bleeding include:
 ■ Tender, swollen, bruised or hard areas 
of the body, such as the abdomen.
 ■ Rapid, weak pulse.
 ■ Skin that feels cool or moist or looks 
pale or bluish.
 ■ Vomiting blood or coughing up blood.
 ■ Excessive thirst.
 ■ An injured extremity that is blue or 
extremely pale.
Epidermis
Dermis
Skin
Hair
Glands
Nerves
Subcutaneous
layer
Fatty tissue
FIGURE 7-1 The soft tissues include the layers of skin, fat and muscle.
FIGURE 7-2 The simplest closed wound is a bruise, which develops 
when the body is bumped or hit. Courtesy of Ted Crites.
 

--- Page 112 ---
100  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
What to Do Until Help Arrives
Many closed wounds, like bruises, do not require special 
medical care. To care for a closed wound, you can apply an 
ice pack to the area to decrease bleeding beneath the skin. 
Applying cold also can be effective in helping to control 
both pain and swelling (Fig. 7-3). Fill a plastic bag with 
ice and water or wrap ice in a wet cloth and apply it to the 
injured area for periods of about 20 minutes. Place a thin 
barrier between the ice and bare skin. Remove the ice 
and wait for 20 minutes before reapplying. If the person 
is not able to tolerate a 20–minute application, apply the 
ice pack for periods of 10 minutes on and off. Elevating 
the injured part may help to reduce swelling; however, 
do not elevate the injured part if it causes more pain.
Do not assume that all closed wounds are minor injuries. 
Take the time to ﬁ nd out whether more serious injuries 
could be present. 
With all closed wounds, help the person to rest 
in the most comfortable position possible. In 
addition, keep the person from getting chilled 
or overheated. It also is helpful to comfort and 
reassure the person. Be sure that a person with an 
injured lower extremity does not bear weight on it 
until advised to do so by a medical professional. 
Open Wounds
In an open wound, the break in the skin can be as 
minor as a scrape of the surface layers or as severe 
as a deep penetration. The amount of bleeding 
depends on the location and severity of the injury. 
The four main types of open soft tissue wounds are 
abrasions, lacerations, avulsions and punctures.
Abrasions 
Abrasions are the most common type of open 
wound (Fig. 7-4). They usually are caused by 
something rubbing roughly against the skin. 
Abrasions do not bleed much. Any bleeding that 
occurs comes from capillaries (tiny blood vessels). 
Dirt and germs frequently have been rubbed into 
this type of wound, which is why it is important 
to clean and irrigate an abrasion thoroughly with 
soap and water to prevent infection. 
Other terms for an abrasion include a scrape, a 
rug burn, a road rash or a strawberry. Abrasions 
usually are painful because scraping of the outer 
skin layers exposes sensitive nerve endings. 
Lacerations 
A laceration is a cut in the skin, which commonly 
is caused by a sharp object, such as a knife, 
scissors or broken glass (Fig. 7-5). A laceration 
also can occur when a blunt force splits the 
skin. Deep lacerations may cut layers of fat and 
muscle, damaging both nerves and blood vessels. 
Bleeding may be heavy or there may be none at 
all. Lacerations are not always painful because 
damaged nerves cannot send pain signals to the 
brain. Infection can easily occur with lacerations 
if proper care is not given.
FIGURE 7-5 LacerationFIGURE 7-4 Abrasion
FIGURE 7-3 Apply ice to a closed wound to help control pain and swelling.
 

--- Page 113 ---
  CHAPTER  7    |    Soft Tissue Injuries    101
Avulsions 
An avulsion is a serious soft tissue injury. It happens 
when a portion of the skin, and sometimes other soft 
tissue, is partially or completely torn away (Fig. 7-6). 
This type of injury often damages deeper tissues, 
causing signiﬁ cant bleeding. Sometimes a violent 
force may completely tear away a body part, including 
bone, such as a ﬁ  nger. This is known as an amputation. 
With amputations, sometimes bleeding is easier 
to control because the tissues close around the vessels 
at the injury site. If there is a violent tearing, twisting 
or crushing of the extremity, the bleeding may be hard 
to control.
Punctures 
Punctures usually occur when a pointed object, 
such as a nail, pierces the skin (Fig. 7-7). A gunshot 
wound is a puncture wound. Puncture wounds do 
not bleed much unless a blood vessel has been injured. 
However, an object that goes into the soft tissues 
beneath the skin can carry germs deep into the body. 
These germs can cause infections—sometimes serious 
ones. If the object remains in the wound, it is called an 
embedded object. 
When to Call 9-1-1
Call 9-1-1 or the local emergency number immediately 
for any major open or closed wound. 
FIGURE 7-8 The area around an infected wound becomes swollen 
and red. Image ©  Fedor Kondratenko, 2010 Used under license from 
Shutterstock.com.
What to Do Until Help Arrives
Give general care for all open wounds. 
Speciﬁ c care depends on whether the 
person has a minor or a major open wound. 
General Care for Open Wounds
General care for open wounds includes 
controlling bleeding, preventing infection 
and using dressings and bandages.
Preventing Infection
When the skin is broken, the best initial 
defense against infection is to clean the 
area. For minor wounds, after controlling 
any bleeding, wash the area with soap and 
water and, if possible, irrigate with large 
amounts of fresh running water to remove 
debris and germs. You should not wash 
more serious wounds that require medical 
attention because they involve more 
extensive tissue damage or bleeding and it 
is more important to control the bleeding.
Sometimes even the best care for a soft 
tissue injury is not enough to prevent 
infection. You usually will be able to 
recognize the early signals of infection. 
The area around the wound becomes swollen and red 
(Fig. 7-8). The area may feel warm or throb with pain. 
Some wounds discharge pus. Serious infections may 
cause a person to develop a fever and feel ill. Red streaks 
may develop that progress from the wound toward the 
heart. If this happens, the infected person should seek 
immediate professional medical attention.
If you see any signals of infection, keep the area clean, soak 
it in clean, warm water and apply an antibiotic ointment 
if the person has no known allergies or sensitivities to the 
medication. Change coverings over the wound daily. 
FIGURE 7-6 Avulsion
 FIGURE 7-7 Puncture
 

--- Page 114 ---
102  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
FOCUS ON PREVENTION
Tetanus is a severe infection that can result 
from a puncture or a deep cut. Tetanus is 
a disease caused by bacteria. These bacteria 
produce a powerful poison in the body. 
The poison enters the nervous system and can 
cause muscle paralysis. Once tetanus reaches 
the nervous system, its effects are highly 
dangerous and can be fatal. Fortunately, tetanus 
often can be successfully treated with medicines 
called antitoxins. 
One way to prevent tetanus is through 
immunizations. All of us need to have a shot to 
protect against tetanus. We also need a booster shot 
at least every 10 years. Check with your health care 
provider to learn whether you need a booster shot if 
either of the following happens:
 ■ Your skin is punctured or cut by an object that 
could carry infection, such as a rusty nail.
 ■ You are bitten by an animal.
TETANUS
Determining if the Person Needs Stitches
It can be difﬁ cult to judge when a wound requires 
stitches. One rule of thumb is that a health care provider 
will need to stitch a wound if the edges of skin do not fall 
together, the laceration involves the face or when any 
wound is over 
1⁄2 inch long (Fig. 7-9).
Stitches speed the healing process, lessen the chances of 
infection and minimize scarring. They should be placed 
within the ﬁ rst few hours after the injury. The following 
major injuries often require stitches:
 ■ Bleeding from an artery or uncontrolled bleeding.
 ■ Wounds that show muscle or bone, involve joints, 
gape widely, or involve hands or feet.
 ■ Wounds from large or deeply embedded objects.
 ■ Wounds from human or animal bites.
 ■ Wounds that, if left unstitched, could leave 
conspicuous scars, such as those on the face.
Using Dressings and Bandages
All open wounds need some type of covering to help 
control bleeding and prevent infection. These coverings 
commonly are referred to as dressings and bandages, 
and there are many types. 
Dressings are pads placed directly on the wound to 
absorb blood and other ﬂ uids and to prevent infection. 
To minimize the chance of infection, dressings should 
be sterile. Most dressings are porous, allowing air to 
circulate to the wound to promote healing. Standard 
dressings include varying sizes of cotton gauze, 
commonly ranging from 2 to 4 inches square (Fig. 7-10). 
Larger dressings are used to cover very large wounds 
and multiple wounds in one body area. Some dressings 
have nonstick surfaces to prevent them from sticking to 
the wound.
An occlusive dressing is a bandage or dressing that 
closes a wound or damaged area of the body and 
FIGURE 7-9 Wounds to the face could cause scarring and therefore 
often require stitches. © iStockphoto.com/Angie Kohler.
FIGURE 7-10 Dressings are placed directly on the wound to absorb 
blood and prevent infection.
 

--- Page 115 ---
  CHAPTER  7    |    Soft Tissue Injuries    103
prevents it from being exposed to the air or water 
(Fig. 7-11). By preventing exposure to the air, occlusive 
dressings help to prevent infection. Occlusive dressings 
help to keep in place medications that have been applied 
to the affected area. They also help to keep in heat, 
body ﬂ uids and moisture. Occlusive dressings are 
manufactured but can be improvised. An example of 
an improvised occlusive dressing is plastic wrap secured 
with medical tape. This type of dressing can be used 
for certain chest and abdominal injuries.
A bandage is any material that is used to wrap or cover 
any part of the body. Bandages are used to hold dressings 
in place, to apply pressure to control bleeding, to protect 
a wound from dirt and infection, and to provide support 
to an injured limb or body part (Fig. 7-12). Any bandage 
applied snugly to create pressure on a wound or an injury 
is called a pressure bandage. 
You can purchase many different types of bandages, 
including:
 ■ Adhesive compresses, which are available in assorted 
sizes and consist of a small pad of nonstick gauze 
on a strip of adhesive tape that is applied directly 
to minor wounds (Fig. 7-13). 
 ■ Bandage compresses, which are thick gauze 
dressings attached to a bandage that is tied in 
place. Bandage compresses are specially designed to 
help control severe bleeding and usually come 
in sterile packages.
 ■ Roller bandages, which are usually made of gauze or 
gauze-like material (Fig. 7-14). Roller bandages are 
available in assorted widths from 
1⁄2 to 12 inches 
(1.3–30.5 cm) and in lengths from 5 to 10 yards. 
A narrow bandage would be used to wrap a hand or 
wrist. A medium-width bandage would be used 
FIGURE 7-11 Occlusive dressings are designed to close a wound 
or damaged area of the body and prevent it from being exposed to 
the air or water.
FIGURE 7-12 Bandages are used to hold dressings in place, control 
bleeding, protect wounds and provide support to an injured limb or 
body part.
FIGURE 7-13 Adhesive compress
FIGURE 7-14 Roller bandage
 

--- Page 116 ---
104  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
for an arm or ankle. A wide bandage would be 
used to wrap a leg. A roller bandage generally is 
wrapped around the body part. It can be tied or 
taped in place. A roller bandage also may be used to 
hold a dressing in place, secure a splint or control 
external bleeding.
Follow these general guidelines when applying 
a roller bandage:
 ■ Check for feeling, warmth and color of the area below 
the injury site, especially ﬁ ngers and toes, before and 
after applying the bandage.
 ■ Elevate the injured body part only if you do not 
suspect that a bone has been broken and if doing 
so does not cause more pain. 
 ■ Secure the end of the bandage in place with a 
turn of the bandage. Wrap the bandage around 
the body part until the dressing is completely 
covered and the bandage extends several inches 
beyond the dressing. Tie or tape the bandage in 
place (Fig. 7-15, A–C).
 ■ Do not cover ﬁ ngers or toes. By keeping these 
parts uncovered, you will be able to see if the 
bandage is too tight (Fig. 7-15, D). If ﬁ ngers or 
toes become cold or begin to turn pale, blue or 
ashen, the bandage is too tight and should be 
loosened slightly.
 ■ Apply additional dressings and another bandage if 
blood soaks through the ﬁ rst bandage. Do not remove 
the blood-soaked bandages and dressings. Disturbing 
them may disrupt the formation of a clot and restart 
the bleeding.
Elastic roller bandages, sometimes called elastic wraps, 
are designed to keep continuous pressure on a body 
part (Fig. 7-16). Elastic bandages are available in 2-, 
3-, 4- and 6-inch widths. As with roller bandages, the 
FIGURE 7-16 Elastic roller bandage
FIGURE 7-15, A–D To apply a roller bandage: A , Start by securing the bandage in place. B , Use overlapping turns to cover 
the dressing completely. C , Tie or tape the bandage in place. D , Check the ﬁ  ngers or toes for feeling, warmth and color.
A B
C D
 

--- Page 117 ---
  CHAPTER  7    |    Soft Tissue Injuries    105
ﬁ rst step in using an elastic bandage is to select the 
correct size of the bandage: a narrow bandage is used 
to wrap a hand or wrist; a medium-width bandage is 
used for an arm or ankle and a wide bandage is used 
to wrap a leg. 
When properly applied, an elastic bandage may control 
swelling or support an injured limb, as in the care for 
a venomous snakebite. However, an improperly 
applied elastic bandage can restrict blood ﬂ ow, which 
is not only painful but also can cause tissue damage if 
not corrected. 
To apply an elastic roller bandage:
 ■ Check the circulation of the limb beyond where you 
will be placing the bandage by checking for feeling, 
warmth and color.
 ■ Place the end of the bandage against the skin and use 
overlapping turns (Fig. 7-17, A). 
 ■ Gently stretch the bandage as you continue 
wrapping (Fig. 7-17, B). The wrap should cover a 
long body section, like an arm or a calf, beginning 
at the point farthest from the heart. For a joint like 
a knee or an ankle, use ﬁ gure-eight turns to support 
the joint. 
 ■ Check the snugness of the bandaging—a ﬁ nger 
should easily, but not loosely, pass under 
the bandage. 
 ■ Always check the area above and below the injury 
site for feeling, warmth and color, especially 
ﬁ ngers and toes, after you have applied an elastic 
roller bandage. By checking both before and 
after bandaging, you will be able to tell if any 
tingling or numbness is from the bandaging or 
the injury.
Speciﬁ c Care Guidelines for Minor 
Open Wounds
In minor open wounds, such as abrasions, there is only 
a small amount of damage and minimal bleeding. 
To care for a minor open wound, follow these general 
guidelines:
 ■ Use a barrier between your hand and the wound. 
If readily available, put on disposable gloves and place 
a sterile dressing on the wound.
 ■ Apply direct pressure for a few minutes to control 
any bleeding.
 ■ Wash the wound thoroughly with soap and water. 
If possible, irrigate an abrasion for about 5 minutes 
with clean, warm, running tap water.
 ■ Apply an antibiotic ointment to a minor wound if 
the person has no known allergies or sensitivities 
to the medication.
 ■ Cover the wound with a sterile dressing and 
a bandage or with an adhesive bandage to keep 
the wound moist and prevent drying. 
Speciﬁ c Care Guidelines for Major 
Open Wounds 
A major open wound has serious tissue damage and 
severe bleeding. To care for a major open wound, 
you must act at once. Follow these steps:
 ■ Put on disposable gloves. If you suspect that 
blood might splatter, you may need to wear eye 
and face protection.
 ■ Control bleeding by:
 { Covering the wound with a dressing and ﬁ rmly 
pressing against the wound with a gloved hand 
until the bleeding stops.
 { Applying a pressure bandage over the dressing 
to maintain pressure on the wound and to 
hold the dressing in place. If blood soaks 
through the bandage, do not remove the 
blood-soaked bandages. Instead, add more 
FIGURE 7-17, A–B A , To apply an elastic bandage: Place 
the bandage against the skin and use overlapping turns. B , 
Gently stretch the bandage as you continue wrapping. The 
wrap should cover a long body section, like an arm or a calf, 
beginning at the point farthest from the heart.
A
B
 

--- Page 118 ---
106  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
dressings and bandages and apply additional 
direct pressure. 
 ■ Continue to monitor the person’s condition. 
Observe the person closely for signals that may 
indicate that the person’s condition is worsening, 
such as faster or slower breathing, changes in skin 
color and restlessness.
 ■ Care for shock. Keep the person from getting chilled 
or overheated.
 ■ Have the person rest comfortably and provide 
reassurance.
 ■ Wash your hands immediately after giving care, even 
if you wore gloves. 
Using Tourniquets When Help Is Delayed
A tourniquet is a tight band placed around an arm 
or leg to constrict blood vessels in order to stop 
blood ﬂ ow to a wound. Because of the potential for 
adverse effects, a tourniquet should be used only 
as a last resort in cases of delayed care or situations 
where response from emergency medical services 
(EMS) is delayed, when direct pressure does not 
stop the bleeding or you are not able to apply 
direct pressure. 
For example, a tourniquet may be appropriate if 
you cannot reach the wound because of entrapment, 
there are multiple injuries or the size of the wound 
prohibits application of direct pressure. In most areas, 
application of a tourniquet is considered to be a skill 
at the emergency medical technician (EMT) level or 
higher and requires proper training. There are several 
types of manufactured tourniquets available and 
are preferred over makeshift (improvised) devices. 
For a manufactured tourniquet, always follow the 
manufacturer’s instructions. 
In general, the tourniquet is applied around the 
wounded extremity, just above the wound. The tag 
end of the strap is routed through the buckle, and the 
strap is pulled tightly, which secures the tourniquet in 
place. The rod (windlass) then is twisted to tighten the 
tourniquet until the bright-red bleeding stops. The rod 
then is secured in place (Fig. 7-18, A–B). The tourniquet 
should not be removed in the prehospital setting once 
it is applied. The time that the tourniquet was applied 
should be noted and recorded and then given to 
EMS personnel.
Blood pressure cuffs sometimes are used as a 
tourniquet to slow the ﬂ ow of blood in an upper 
extremity. Another technique is to use a bandage 
that is 4 inches wide and six to eight layers deep. 
Always follow local protocols when the use of a 
tourniquet is considered.
Hemostatic Agents
Hemostatic agents generally are substances that speed 
clot formation by absorbing the excess moisture caused 
by the bleeding. Hemostatic agents are found in a 
variety of forms, including treated sponge or gauze pads 
and powder or granular forms. The powder or granular 
forms are poured directly on the bleeding vessel, then 
other hemostatic agents, such as gauze pads, are used 
in conjunction with direct pressure. 
Over-the-counter versions of hemostatic bandages are 
available in addition to hemostatic agents intended for 
use by professional rescuers. Some are more effective 
than others. However, because some types present 
a risk of further injury or tissue damage, the routine 
use of hemostatic agents in ﬁ rst aid settings is not 
recommended. 
BURNS
Burns are a special kind of soft tissue injury. Like other 
types of soft tissue injury, burns can damage the top 
layer of skin or the skin and the layers of fat, muscle and 
bone beneath. 
FIGURE 7-18, A–B When applying a tourniquet: A , Twist the rod to 
tighten until bright-red bleeding stops. B , Secure it in place.
A
B
 

--- Page 119 ---
  CHAPTER  7    |    Soft Tissue Injuries    107
Burns are classiﬁ  ed by their depth. The deeper the 
burn, the more severe it is. The three classiﬁ cations of 
burns are as follows: superﬁ  cial (sometimes referred to as 
ﬁ rst degree) (Fig. 7-19, A), partial thickness (sometimes 
referred to as second degree) (Fig. 7-19, B) and full 
thickness (sometimes referred to as third degree) 
(Fig. 7-19, C). Burns also are classiﬁ  ed by their source: 
heat (thermal), chemical, electrical and radiation (such as 
from the sun).
A critical burn requires immediate medical attention. 
These burns are potentially life threatening, disﬁ guring 
and disabling. Unfortunately, it often is difﬁ cult to tell if 
a burn is critical. Even superﬁ cial burns can be critical if 
they affect a large area or certain body parts. You cannot 
judge a burn’s severity by the person’s level of pain 
because nerve endings may be destroyed. 
Be aware that burns to a child or an infant could 
be caused by child abuse. Burns that are done 
intentionally to a child often leave an injury that 
cannot be hidden. One example is a sharp line 
dividing the burned and unburned skin such as 
from scalding water in a tub. If you think you have 
reasonable cause to believe that abuse has occurred, 
report your suspicions to the appropriate community 
or state agency. For more information on child abuse, 
see Chapter 9.
What to Look For
Signals of burns depend on whether the burn is 
superﬁ cial, partial thickness or full thickness. 
 ■ Superﬁ cial burns:
 { Involve only the top layer of skin.
 { Cause skin to become red and dry, usually 
painful and the area may swell.
 { Usually heal within a week without 
permanent scarring.
 ■ Partial-thickness burns:
 { Involve the top layers of skin.
 { Cause skin to become red; usually painful; 
have blisters that may open and weep clear ﬂ uid, 
making the skin appear wet; may appear mottled; 
and often swells.
 { Usually heal in 3 to 4 weeks and may scar.
 ■ Full-thickness burns:
 { May destroy all layers of skin and some or all 
of the underlying structures—fat, muscles, 
bones and nerves.
 { The skin may be brown or black (charred), 
with the tissue underneath sometimes 
appearing white, and can either be extremely 
painful or relatively painless (if the burn destroys 
nerve endings).
 { Healing may require medical assistance; scarring 
is likely.
When to Call 9-1-1
You should always call 9-1-1 or the local emergency 
number if the burned person has:
 ■ Trouble breathing.
 ■ Burns covering more than one body part or a large 
surface area.
 ■ Suspected burns to the airway. Burns to the mouth 
and nose may be a sign of this.
 ■ Burns to the head, neck, hands, feet 
or genitals.
 ■ A full-thickness burn and is younger than 5 years 
or older than 60 years.
 ■ A burn caused by chemicals, explosions 
or electricity.
What to Do Until Help Arrives
Care given for burns depends on the type of burn.
Heat (Thermal) Burns
Follow these basic steps when caring for a heat burn:
 ■ Check the scene for safety.
 ■ Stop the burning by removing the person from the 
source of the burn.
 ■ Check for life-threatening conditions.
FIGURE 7-19, A–C The three classiﬁ  cations of burns are A , superﬁ cial burns, B , partial-thickness burns and C, full-thickness burns. Courtesy of 
Alan Dimick, M.D., Professor of Surgery, Former Director of UAB Burn Center.
A
 B
 C
 

--- Page 120 ---
108  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
 ■ As soon as possible, cool the burn with large 
amounts of cold running water, at least until pain 
is relieved (Fig. 7-20, A).
 ■ Cover the burn loosely with a sterile dressing 
(Fig. 7-20, B).
 ■ Take steps to minimize shock. Keep the person from 
getting chilled or overheated.
 ■ Comfort and reassure the person.
 ■ Do not apply ice or ice water to any burn. Ice and 
ice water can cause the body to lose heat rapidly and 
further damages body tissues.
 ■ Do not touch a burn with anything except a clean 
covering.
 ■ Do not remove pieces of clothing that stick to the 
burned area.
 ■ Do not try to clean a severe burn.
 ■ Do not break blisters.
 ■ Do not use any kind of ointment on a severe burn.
When a person suffers a burn, he or she is less able to 
regulate body temperature. As a result, a person who has 
been burned tends to become chilled. To help maintain 
body temperature and prevent hypothermia, keep the 
person warm and away from drafts. Remember that 
cooling a burn over a large area of the body can bring on 
hypothermia. Be aware of this risk and look for signals 
of hypothermia. If possible, monitor the person’s core 
body temperature when cooling a burn that covers 
a large area.
Chemical Burns
When caring for chemical burns it is important to 
remember that the chemical will continue to burn as long 
as it is on the skin. You must remove the chemical from 
the skin as quickly as possible. To do so, follow these steps:
 ■ If the burn was caused by dry chemicals, brush off the 
chemicals using gloved hands or a towel and remove any 
contaminated clothing before ﬂ  ushing with tap water 
(under pressure). Be careful not to get the chemical on 
yourself or on a different area of the person’s skin.
 ■ Flush the burn with large amounts of cool running 
water. Continue ﬂ ushing the burn for at least 
20 minutes or until EMS personnel take over.
 ■ If an eye is burned by a chemical, ﬂ ush the affected 
eye with water until EMS personnel take over. 
Tilt the head so that the affected eye is lower than 
the unaffected eye as you ﬂ  ush (Fig. 7-21).
 ■ If possible, have the person remove contaminated 
clothes to prevent further contamination while you 
continue to ﬂ  ush the area.
Be aware that chemicals can be inhaled, potentially 
damaging the airway or lungs.
Electrical Burns
If you encounter a person with an electrical burn, 
you should:
 ■ Never go near the person until you are sure he or she 
is not still in contact with the power source.
 ■ Turn off the power at its source and care for any 
life-threatening conditions.
 ■ Call 9-1-1 or the local emergency number. Any person 
who has suffered an electrical shock needs to be 
evaluated by a medical professional to determine the 
extent of injury.
FIGURE 7-21 If an eye is burned by a chemical, ﬂ  ush the affected 
eye with water until EMS personnel take over.
A
FIGURE 7-20 A–B A , Cool a thermal burn with large amounts of cold 
running water until the pain is relieved. B , Cover a thermal burn loosely 
with a sterile dressing.
B
 

--- Page 121 ---
  CHAPTER  7    |    Soft Tissue Injuries    109
 ■ Be aware that electrocution can cause cardiac and 
respiratory emergencies. Therefore, be prepared 
to perform CPR or use an automated external 
deﬁ brillator (AED).
 ■ Care for shock and thermal burns.
 ■ Look for entry and exit wounds and give the 
appropriate care (Fig. 7-22). 
 ■ Remember that anyone suffering from electric shock 
requires advanced medical care.
Radiation Burns
Care for a radiation (sun) burn as you would for any 
thermal burn (Fig. 7-23). Always cool the burn and 
protect the area from further damage by keeping the 
person away from the source of the burn.
Preventing Burns 
 ■ Heat burns can be prevented by following safety 
practices that prevent ﬁ re and by being careful around 
sources of heat.
 ■ Chemical burns can be prevented by following 
safety practices around all chemicals and by following 
manufacturers’ guidelines when handling chemicals.
 ■ Electrical burns can be prevented by following 
safety practices around electrical lines and 
equipment and by leaving outdoor areas when 
lightning could strike.
 ■ Sunburn can be prevented by wearing appropriate 
clothing and using sunscreen. Sunscreen should have 
a sun protection factor (SPF) of at least 15.
SPECIAL SITUATIONS
Certain types of wounds need special attention or care. 
These types of situations include crush injury; severed 
body parts (amputations); impaled objects; and injury 
to the mouth, nose, lip, tooth, chest and abdomen. 
Crush Injuries
A crush injury is caused by strong pressure against a body 
part, often a limb. It may result in serious damage to 
underlying tissue, causing bruising, bleeding, lacerations, 
fractures, shock and internal injuries. Call 9-1-1 or the 
local emergency number for any serious or life-threatening 
condition. Care for speciﬁ  c injuries found and assume that 
internal injuries are present. Also care for shock. 
Severed Body Parts
If part of the body has been torn or cut off, call 9-1-1 or 
the local emergency number, then try to ﬁ  nd the part and 
wrap it in sterile gauze or any clean material, such as a 
washcloth. Put the wrapped part in a plastic bag and seal 
the bag. Keep the part cold and bag cool by placing it in a 
larger bag or container of an ice and water slurry, not on 
ice alone and not on dry ice, if possible, but do not freeze 
(Fig. 7-24). Be sure the part is taken to the hospital with 
the person. Doctors may be able to reattach it.
FIGURE 7-22 For an electrical burn, look for entry and exit wounds 
and give the appropriate care.
FIGURE 7-23 Care for sunburn as you would for any thermal burn. 
FIGURE 7-24 Wrap a severed body part in sterile gauze, put it in a 
plastic bag and put the bag on ice.
 

--- Page 122 ---
110  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
Embedded Objects
If an object, such as a knife or a piece of glass or metal, 
is embedded in a wound, do not remove it. Place several 
dressings around it to keep it from moving (Fig. 7-25). 
Bandage the dressings in place around the object. 
If it is only a splinter in the surface of the skin, it can be 
removed with tweezers. After removing the splinter from 
the skin, wash the area with soap and water, rinsing the 
area with tap water for about 5 minutes. After drying 
the area, apply an antibiotic ointment to the area if 
the person has no known allergies or sensitivities to 
the medication and then cover it to keep it clean. If the 
splinter is in the eye, do not attempt to remove it. Call 
9-1-1 or the local emergency number. 
Nose Injuries
Nose injuries usually are caused by a blow from a 
blunt object, often resulting in a nosebleed. High 
blood pressure or changes in altitude also can cause 
nosebleeds. In most cases, you can control bleeding 
by having the person sit with the head slightly forward 
while pinching the nostrils together for about 10 minutes 
(Fig. 7-26). If pinching the nostrils does not control the 
bleeding, other methods include applying an ice pack to 
the bridge of the nose or putting pressure on the upper 
lip just beneath the nose. Remember, ice should not be 
applied directly to the skin since it can damage the skin 
tissue. Place a cloth between the ice and the skin. Seek 
medical attention if the bleeding persists or recurs or if 
the person says that it is caused by high blood pressure.
Mouth Injuries
With mouth injuries, you must make sure the person is 
able to breathe. Injuries to the mouth may cause breathing 
problems if blood or loose teeth block the airway.
If the person is bleeding from the mouth and you 
do not suspect a serious head, neck or spinal injury, 
place the person in a seated position leaning slightly 
forward. This will allow any blood to drain from the 
mouth. If this position is not possible, place the person 
on his or her side.
Lip Injuries
For injuries that penetrate the lip, place a rolled dressing 
between the lip and the gum. You can place another 
dressing on the outer surface of the lip. If the tongue is 
bleeding, apply a dressing and direct pressure. Applying 
cold to the lips or tongue can help to reduce swelling and 
ease pain.
Tooth Injuries
If a person’s tooth is knocked out, control the bleeding and 
save the tooth so it may possibly be reinserted. When the 
ﬁ bers and tissues are torn from the socket, it is important 
for the person to seek dental or emergency care as soon as 
possible after the injury. Generally, the sooner the tooth is 
replaced, the better the chance is that it will survive. 
If the person is conscious and able to cooperate, rinse 
out the mouth with cold tap water if available. You can 
control the bleeding by placing a rolled sterile dressing 
into the space left by the missing tooth (Fig. 7-27). Have 
FIGURE 7-25 Place several dressings around an embedded object to 
keep it from moving. Bandage the dressings in place around the object.
FIGURE 7-26 To control a nosebleed, have the person lean forward 
and pinch the nostrils together until bleeding stops (about 10 minutes).
FIGURE 7-27 You can control the bleeding by placing a rolled sterile 
dressing and inserting it into the space left by the missing tooth.
 

--- Page 123 ---
  CHAPTER  7    |    Soft Tissue Injuries    111
the person gently bite down to maintain pressure. To save 
the tooth, place it in milk, if possible, or cool water if milk 
is not available. Be careful to pick up the tooth only by the 
crown (white part) rather than by the root. 
Chest Injuries
The chest is the upper part of the trunk. It is shaped by 
12 pairs of ribs. Ten of the pairs attach to the sternum 
(breastbone) in front and to the spine in back. Two pairs, 
the ﬂ oating ribs, attach only to the spine. The rib cage, 
formed by the ribs, the sternum and the spine, protects 
vital organs, such as the heart, major blood vessels and 
the lungs. Also in the chest are the esophagus, trachea 
and muscles used for respiration. 
Chest injuries are a leading cause of trauma deaths each 
year. Injuries to the chest may result from a wide variety 
of causes, such as motor vehicle crashes, falls, sports 
mishaps and crushing or penetrating forces. Chest 
injuries may involve the bones that form the chest cavity 
or the organs or other structures in the cavity itself. 
Chest wounds may be either closed or open. A closed 
chest wound does not break the skin. Closed chest 
wounds generally are caused by blunt objects, such as 
steering wheels. Open chest wounds occur when an 
object, such as a knife or bullet, penetrates the chest 
wall. Fractured ribs may break through the skin to cause 
an open chest injury.
Rib fractures usually are caused by direct force to 
the chest. 
Puncture wounds to the chest range from minor to life 
threatening. Stab and gunshot wounds are examples 
of puncture injuries. The penetrating object can injure 
any structure or organ within the chest, including the 
lungs. A puncture injury can allow air to enter the chest 
through the wound. Air in the chest cavity does not allow 
the lungs to function normally.
Puncture wounds cause varying degrees of internal and 
external bleeding. A puncture wound to the chest is a 
life-threatening injury. If the injury penetrates the rib 
cage, air can pass freely in and out of the chest cavity 
and the person cannot breathe normally. With each 
breath the person takes, you will hear a sucking sound 
coming from the wound. This sound is the primary 
signal of a penetrating chest injury called a sucking chest 
wound (Fig. 7-28). Without proper care, the person’s 
condition will worsen. The affected lung or lungs will fail 
to function, and breathing will become more difﬁ cult.
What to Look For
Signals of a serious chest injury include:
 ■ Trouble breathing.
 ■ Severe pain at the site of the injury.
 ■ Flushed, pale, ashen or bluish skin.
 ■ Obvious deformity, such as that caused by 
a fracture.
 ■ Coughing up blood (may be bright red or dark, like 
coffee grounds).
 ■ Bruising at the site of a blunt injury, such as that 
caused by a seat belt. 
 ■ A “sucking” noise or distinct sound when the person 
breathes. 
When to Call 9-1-1
Call 9-1-1 or the local emergency number for any open 
or closed chest wound, especially if the person has a 
puncture wound to the chest. Also call if the person has 
trouble breathing or a sucking chest wound, or if you 
suspect rib fractures.
What to Do Until Help Arrives
Care for a chest injury depends on the type of injury. 
Caring for Rib Fractures
Although painful, a simple rib fracture is rarely life 
threatening. Give the person a blanket or pillow to hold 
against the fractured ribs. Use a sling and binder to hold 
the person’s arm against the injured side of the chest. 
Monitor breathing.
FIGURE 7-28 If the injury penetrates the rib cage, air can pass freely 
in and out of the chest cavity and the person cannot breathe normally.
 

--- Page 124 ---
112  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
Caring for a Sucking Chest Wound
To care for a sucking chest wound, cover the wound with 
a large occlusive dressing (Fig. 7-29, A–B). A piece of 
plastic wrap, or a plastic bag folded several times and 
placed over the wound, makes an effective occlusive 
dressing. Tape the dressing in place except for one side 
or corner, which should remain loose. A taped-down 
dressing keeps air from entering the wound when the 
person inhales, and having an open corner allows air to 
escape when the person exhales. If these materials are 
not available to use as dressings, use a folded cloth. Take 
steps to minimize shock. Monitor the person’s breathing. 
Abdominal Injury
Like a chest injury, an injury to the abdomen may be 
either open or closed. Injuries to the abdomen can be 
very painful. Even with a closed wound, the rupture 
of an organ can cause serious internal bleeding, 
resulting in shock. It is especially difﬁ  cult to determine 
if a person has an internal abdominal injury if he or she 
is unconscious.
Always suspect an abdominal injury in a person who has 
multiple injuries. 
What to Look For
Signals of serious abdominal injury include:
 ■ Severe pain.
 ■ Bruising.
 ■ External bleeding.
 ■ Nausea.
 ■ Vomiting (sometimes blood).
 ■ Weakness.
 ■ Thirst.
 ■ Pain, tenderness or a tight feeling in the abdomen.
 ■ Organs protruding from the abdomen.
 ■ Rigid abdominal muscles.
 ■ Other signals of shock.
When to Call 9-1-1
Call 9-1-1 or the local emergency number for any serious 
abdominal injury. 
What to Do Until Help Arrives
With a severe open injury, abdominal organs 
sometimes protrude through the wound (Fig. 7-30, A). 
To care for an open wound to the abdomen, follow 
these steps:
1.  Put on disposable gloves or use another barrier.
2.  Carefully position the person on his or her back 
with the knees bent, if that position does not 
cause pain.
3. Do not apply direct pressure.
4.  Do not push any protruding organs back into 
the open wound.
5.  Remove clothing from around the wound 
(Fig. 7-30, B).
6.  Apply moist, sterile dressings loosely over the 
wound (clean, warm tap water can be used) 
(Fig. 7-30, C).
7.  Cover dressings loosely with plastic wrap, 
if available (Fig. 7-30, D).
To care for a closed wound to the abdomen:
 ■ While keeping the injured area still, apply cold to the 
affected area to control pain and swelling.
 ■ Carefully position the person on his or her back with 
the knees bent, if that position does not cause pain.
 ■ Keep the person from getting chilled or overheated.
FIGURE 7-29, A–B A,  An occlusive dressing helps keep air from entering a chest wound when the person inhales. B, Having an open corner allows 
air to escape when the person exhales.
A B
 

--- Page 125 ---
  CHAPTER  7    |    Soft Tissue Injuries    113
PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER 
For minor soft tissue injuries like scrapes, bruises and 
sunburns, it is important to give quick care and take 
steps to prevent infection. If you do this, these types of 
wounds and burns usually heal quickly and completely. 
Serious and life-threatening soft tissue injuries are 
emergencies. 
Call 9-1-1 or the local emergency number and give 
immediate care. These are crucial steps for any serious 
wound or burn.
FIGURE 7-30, A–D A , Wounds to the abdomen can cause the organs to protrude. B , Carefully remove clothing from around the 
wound. C , Cover the organs loosely with a moist, sterile dressing. D , Cover the dressings loosely with plastic wrap, if available.
A B
C D
 

--- Page 126 ---
114  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
CONTROLLING EXTERNAL BLEEDING  
SKILL SHEET
AFTER CHECKING THE SCENE AND THE INJURED OR ILL PERSON: 
  COVER THE WOUND  
Cover the wound with a sterile dressing. 
  APPL Y DIRECT PRESSURE 
Apply pressure until bleeding stops.
  COVER DRESSING WITH BANDAGE 
Check for circulation beyond the injury 
(check for feeling, warmth and color).
  APPLY MORE PRESSURE AND CALL 9-1-1 
If bleeding does not stop:
 ■Apply more dressings and bandages and continue to apply additional pressure.
 ■Take steps to minimize shock.
 ■CALL 9-1-1 if not already done.
TIP: Wash hands with soap and water after giving care. 
 

--- Page 127 ---
  CHAPTER  7    |    Soft Tissue Injuries    115
USING A MANUFACTURED TOURNIQUET
SKILL SHEET
NOTE: Always follow standard precautions and follow manufacturer’s instructions 
when applying a tourniquet. Call 9-1-1 or the local emergency number.
  POSITION THE TOURNIQUET  
Place the tourniquet around the limb, approximately 2 inches 
(about two ﬁ  nger widths) above the wound but not over a joint. 
  PULL STRAP THROUGH BUCKLE 
 ■Route the tag end of the strap through the buckle, 
if necessary.
 ■Pull the strap tightly and secure it in place.
  TWIST THE ROD 
Tighten the tourniquet by twisting the rod until the 
ﬂ  ow of bleeding stops and secure the rod in place. 
Do not cover the tourniquet with clothing.
  RECORD TIME 
Note and record the time that you applied the tourniquet and give this information to EMS personnel. 
 

--- Page 128 ---
116  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
Injuries to Muscles, Bones 
and Joints
CHAPTER   8
I 
njuries to muscles, bones and joints happen to people of all ages at home, work and play. A person may fall while 
walking in the park and bruise the muscles of a leg. Equipment may fall on a worker and break bones. A skier may fall 
and twist a leg, tearing muscles in the process. 
These injuries are painful and make life difﬁ  cult, but they seldom are life threatening. However, if they are not 
recognized and care is not given, they can cause serious problems. In the rare case of a head, neck or spinal injury, 
lifelong disability, or even death, can result if immediate care is not given.
This chapter discusses the signals of muscle, bone and joint injuries and how to give care for these injuries. In addition, 
you will read about how to recognize head, neck and spinal injuries, and how to give immediate, potentially life-saving 
care in these situations.
 

--- Page 129 ---
  CHAPTER  8    |    Injuries to Muscles, Bones and Joints 117
BACKGROUND
The body’s skeleton is made up of bones, muscles, 
and the tendons and ligaments that connect them. 
They give the body shape and stability. Bones and 
muscles give the body shape and mobility. Tendons and 
ligaments connect to muscle and bones, giving support. 
They all work together to allow the body to move.
Muscles
Muscles are soft tissues. The body has over 600 muscles, 
most of which are attached to bones by strong tissues 
called tendons (Fig. 8-1). Unlike other soft tissues, 
muscles are able to shorten and lengthen—contract 
and relax. This contracting and relaxing enables the 
body to move. The brain directs the muscles to move 
through the spinal cord, a pathway of nerves in the 
spine. Tiny jolts of electricity called electrical impulses 
travel through the nerves to the muscles. They cause 
the muscles to contract. When the muscles contract, 
they pull at the bones, causing motion at a joint.
FIGURE 8-1 The body has over 600 muscles, most of which are attached to bones by strong tissues called tendons.
Face muscles
Deltoid
Biceps Triceps
Deltoid
Extensors
of wrist
and 
fingers
Extensors
of wrist
and 
fingers
Extensors
of foot
and toes
Chest
muscles
Neck
muscles
Back
muscles
Gluteus
maximus
Hamstring
muscles
Calf
muscles
Achilles
tendon
Neck
muscles
Groin
muscles
Abdominal
muscles
Quadriceps
muscles
FRONT VIEW BACK VIEW
Injuries to the brain, spinal cord or nerves can affect 
muscle control. When nerves lose control of muscles, 
it is called paralysis. When a muscle is injured, a nearby 
muscle often takes over for the injured one.
Bones
Approximately 200 bones in various sizes and shapes 
form the skeleton (Fig. 8-2). The skeleton protects 
many of the organs inside the body. Bones are hard 
and dense. Because they are strong and rigid, they are 
not injured easily. Bones have a rich supply of blood 
and nerves. Bone injuries can bleed and usually are 
painful. If care is not given for the injury, the bleeding 
can become life threatening. Children have more ﬂ exible 
bones than adults; their bones break less easily. But if 
a child sustains a fracture to a growth plate (areas of 
developing cartilage near the ends of long bones), it can 
affect future bone growth. Bones weaken with age. Older 
adults have more brittle bones. Sometimes they break 
surprisingly easily. This gradual weakening of bones is 
called osteoporosis. 
 

--- Page 130 ---
118  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
Joints
The ends of two or more bones coming 
together at one place form a joint 
(Fig. 8-3). Strong, tough bands called 
ligaments hold the bones at a joint 
together. All joints have a normal range 
of movement in which they can move 
freely, without too much stress or 
strain. When joints are forced beyond 
this range, ligaments stretch and tear.
TYPES OF INJURIES
The four basic types of injuries to 
muscles, bones and joints are fractures, 
dislocations, sprains and strains. They 
occur in a variety of ways. 
Fractures
A fracture is a complete break, a chip 
or a crack in a bone (Fig. 8-4). A fall, 
a blow or sometimes even a twisting 
movement can cause a fracture. 
Fractures are open or closed. An open 
fracture involves an open wound. 
It occurs when the end of a bone tears 
through the skin. An object that goes 
into the skin and breaks the bone, 
such as a bullet, also can cause an 
open fracture. In a closed fracture 
the skin is not broken. 
FIGURE 8-2 Approximately 200 bones in various sizes and shapes form the skeleton. 
The skeleton protects many of the organs inside of the body.
Ribs
Sternum
Skull
Spinal
column
Thorax Thorax
Spinal
column
Coccyx
Pelvis
Radius
Ulna
Humerus
Clavicle
Scapula
Femur
Tibia
Fibula
Patella
Cranium
Front View Back View
Face
FIGURE 8-3 The ends of two or more bones coming together at 
one place form a joint.
Pelvis
Femur
Hip
FIGURE 8-4 A fracture is a crack, complete break or 
chip in a bone.
Cracked
bone
Broken
bone
Chipped
bone
 

--- Page 131 ---
  CHAPTER  8    |    Injuries to Muscles, Bones and Joints 119
FOCUS ON PREVENTION
THE BREAKING POINT
Osteoporosis is a disease that causes the bones 
to fracture easily. Approximately 10 million Americans 
have osteoporosis, and 80 percent of these are 
women. In 2005, some 2 million spine, hip, wrist and 
other fractures occurred in the United States because 
of osteoporosis. People usually have osteoporosis 
for decades before they experience signals. People 
do not usually become aware they have this “silent” 
disease until after the age of 60 years. 
The disease is caused by a decrease in calcium 
content of the bones. Normal bones are hard, dense 
tissues that endure great stresses. Calcium is a key 
to bone growth, development and repair. When the 
calcium content of bones decreases, bones become 
frail and less dense. They are less able to repair 
the normal damage they incur. This leaves bones, 
especially hip, back and wrist, more prone to fractures. 
These fractures may occur with only a little force. Some 
even occur without force. The person may be taking a 
walk or washing dishes when the fracture occurs.
Risk Factors
The risk of an American woman suffering a hip 
fracture alone is equal to her combined risk of breast, 
uterine and ovarian cancer. Some risk factors for 
osteoporosis cannot be changed, including:
 ■ Being female.
 ■ Having ancestors from northern Europe, the 
British Isles, Japan or China. 
 ■ Being of an advanced age. 
 ■ Having a family history of the disease.
 ■ Having a small, thin body frame.
 ■ Reaching menopause.
However, other risk factors can be changed; there 
are steps that a person can take to lower the risk 
of developing osteoporosis. These involve lifestyle 
choices, including improving diet and exercise, 
reducing alcohol consumption and stopping smoking. 
Preventing Osteoporosis
Osteoporosis can begin as early as 30 years of 
age. Building strong bones before age 35 years is 
the key to preventing osteoporosis. To help prevent 
osteoporosis, take the following steps:
 ■ Eat a Well-Balanced Diet. A diet rich in 
calcium, vitamins and minerals and low in salt 
is essential for bone health. Limiting caffeine 
intake and avoiding a high protein diet also 
are important for bone health.
As a person ages, the amount of calcium 
absorbed from the diet declines, making 
it more important to have an adequate 
calcium intake. Calcium is necessary to 
bone building and maintenance. Three to 
four daily servings of low-fat dairy products 
should provide enough calcium for good 
bone health. 
Vitamin D also is necessary because it helps 
the body to absorb the calcium to strengthen 
bones. Exposure to sunshine enables the body 
to make vitamin D. People who do not receive 
adequate exposure to the sun need to eat 
foods that contain vitamin D. The best sources 
are vitamin-fortiﬁ  ed milk and fatty ﬁ sh, such as 
tuna, salmon and eel. When exposing yourself 
to the sun, however, you should not risk a burn 
or deep tan because both increase the risk of 
skin cancer. 
 ■ Take Vitamins and Supplements if 
Necessary. People who do not take in adequate 
calcium may be able to make up for the loss by 
taking calcium supplements. Some are combined 
with vitamin D. Before taking a calcium 
supplement, consult your health care provider. 
Many highly advertised calcium supplements are 
ineffective because they do not dissolve in the 
gastrointestinal tract and cannot be absorbed. An 
insufﬁ  cient intake of phosphorous, magnesium, 
and vitamins K, B
6 and B12 also can increase 
your risk for osteoporosis. To ensure that you are 
getting enough of these vitamins and minerals, 
talk to your health care provider about taking a 
daily multivitamin. 
 ■ Exercise. Exercise also is necessary to 
building strong bones. Weight-bearing exercise 
increases bone density and the activity of 
bone-building cells. Regular exercise may 
reduce the rate of bone loss by promoting 
new bone formation. It also may stimulate the 
(Continued )
 

--- Page 132 ---
120  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
Closed fractures are more common, but open fractures are 
more dangerous because they carry a risk of infection and 
severe bleeding. In general, fractures are life threatening 
only if they involve breaks in large bones such as the 
thigh, sever an artery or affect breathing. Since you cannot 
always tell if a person has a fracture, you should consider 
the cause of the injury. A fall from a signiﬁ  cant height or 
a motor vehicle crash could signal a possible fracture.
Dislocations
Dislocations usually are more obvious than fractures. 
A dislocation is the movement of a bone at a joint away 
from its normal position (Fig. 8-5). This movement 
usually is caused by a violent force tearing the ligaments 
that hold the bones in place. When a bone is moved out 
of place, the joint no longer functions. The displaced end 
of the bone often forms a bump, a ridge or a hollow that 
does not normally exist.
Sprains
A sprain is the tearing of ligaments at a joint 
(Fig. 8-6). Mild sprains may swell but usually heal 
quickly. The person might not feel much pain and 
is active again soon. If a person ignores the signals 
of swelling and pain and becomes active too soon, 
the joint will not heal properly and will remain weak. 
There is a good chance that it will become reinjured, 
only this time more severely. A severe sprain also can 
involve a fracture or dislocation of the bones at the joint. 
The joints most easily injured are at the ankle, knee, 
wrist and ﬁ ngers.
FOCUS ON PREVENTION  (Continued )
skeletal system to repair itself. An effective 
exercise program, such as aerobics, jogging 
or walking, involves the weight-bearing bones 
and muscles of the legs.
 ■ Stop Smoking. Smoking is bad for your 
bone health since it can block your body’s ability 
to absorb calcium. The chemicals in cigarettes 
are bad for bone cells. Also, in women, smoking 
can block the bone-protective effects of the 
hormone estrogen, which can affect bone 
density. 
 ■ Avoid Too Much Alcohol. Alcohol intake 
should be limited to two drinks a day. Drinking 
more than this on a regular basis can reduce 
bone formation. Too much alcohol also can 
reduce calcium levels in the body. 
If you have questions about your health and 
osteoporosis, consult your health care provider.
FIGURE 8-5 A dislocation is the 
movement of a bone at a joint away from its 
normal position.
 FIGURE 8-6 A sprain is the tearing of ligaments at a joint.
 

--- Page 133 ---
  CHAPTER  8    |    Injuries to Muscles, Bones and Joints 121
Strains
A strain is a stretching and tearing of muscles or 
tendons (Fig. 8-7). Strains often are caused by lifting 
something heavy or working a muscle too hard. They 
usually involve the muscles in the neck, back, thigh or 
the back of the lower leg. Some strains can reoccur, 
especially in the neck and back.
What to Look For
Always suspect a severe injury when any of the following 
signals are present: 
 ■ There is pain. One of the most common signals in any 
muscle, bone or joint injury is pain. The injured area 
may be very painful to touch and move. 
 ■ There is signiﬁ cant bruising and swelling. The area 
may be swollen and red or bruised. 
 ■ There is signiﬁ cant deformity. The area may be 
twisted or strangely bent (Fig. 8-8). It may have 
abnormal lumps, ridges and hollows.
 ■ The person is unable to use the affected part normally.
 ■ There are bone fragments sticking out of a wound.
 ■ The person feels bones grating or the person felt or 
heard a snap or pop at the time of injury.
 ■ The injured area is cold, numb and tingly.
 ■ The cause of the injury suggests that it may be severe.
It can be difﬁ cult to tell if an injury is to a muscle, 
bone or joint. Sometimes an x-ray, computer assisted 
tomography (CAT) scan or magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) is needed to determine the extent of the injury. 
When to Call 9-1-1
Call 9-1-1 or the local emergency number for the 
following situations:
 ■ There is obvious deformity.
 ■ There is moderate or severe swelling and discoloration.
 ■ Bones sound or feel like they are rubbing together.
 ■ A snap or pop was heard or felt at the time of the injury.
 ■ There is a fracture with an open wound at, or bone 
piercing through, the injury site.
 ■ The injured person cannot move or use the affected 
part normally.
 ■ The injured area is cold and numb.
 ■ The injury involves the head, neck or spine.
 ■ The injured person has trouble breathing.
 ■ The cause of the injury suggests that the injury 
may be severe.
 ■ It is not possible to safely or comfortably move 
the person to a vehicle for transport to a hospital.
What to Do Until Help Arrives
General care for injuries to muscles, bone and joints 
includes following the mnemonic RICE:
 ■ Rest—Do not move or straighten the injured area.
 ■ Immobilize—Stabilize the injured area in the position 
it was found. Splint the injured part only if the person 
must be moved or transported to receive medical care 
and it does not cause more pain (see Splinting an 
Injury). Minimizing movement can prevent further 
injury.
 ■ Cold—Fill a plastic bag with ice and water or wrap ice 
with a damp cloth and apply ice to the injured area for 
periods of about 20 minutes (Fig. 8-9). Place a thin 
barrier between the ice and bare skin. If 20-minute 
icing cannot be tolerated, apply ice for periods of 10 
minutes. If continued icing is needed, remove the 
pack for 20 minutes, and then replace it. Cold reduces 
internal bleeding, pain and swelling. Do not apply heat 
as there is no evidence that applying heat helps muscle, 
bone or joint injuries.
FIGURE 8-7 A strain is a stretching and tearing of muscles or tendons.
FIGURE 8-8 A severely injured bone or joint may appear to be 
deformed.
 

--- Page 134 ---
122  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
 ■ Elevate—Elevate the injured part only if it does not 
cause more pain. Elevating the injured part may help 
reduce swelling.
Some injuries, such as a broken ﬁ  nger, may not require you 
to call 9-1-1 or the local emergency number, yet they still 
need medical attention. When transporting the person to a 
medical facility, have someone else drive. This way you can 
keep an eye on the person and give care if needed. Injuries 
to the pelvis, hip or thigh can be life threatening. A person 
with such an injury should not be moved unnecessarily. 
Minimizing movement until EMS personnel take over can 
help to prevent the injury from becoming worse.
Splinting an Injury
Splinting is a method of immobilizing an injured part 
to minimize movement and prevent further injury and 
should be used only if you have to move or transport 
the person to seek medical attention and if it does not 
cause more pain. Splint an injury in the position in 
which you ﬁ  nd it. For fractures, splint the joints above 
and below the site of the injury. For sprains or joint 
injuries, splint the bones above and below the site of 
the injury. If you are not sure if the injury is a fracture 
or a sprain, splint both the bones and joints above and 
below the point of injury. Splinting materials should 
be soft or padded for comfort. Check for circulation 
(feeling, warmth and color) before and after splinting to 
make sure that the splint is not too tight.
There are many methods of splinting, including:
 ■ Anatomic splints. The person’s body is the splint. 
For example, you can splint an arm to the chest or an 
injured leg to the uninjured leg (Fig. 8-10). 
 ■ Soft splints. Soft materials, such as a folded blanket, 
towel, pillow or folded triangular bandage, can be 
used for the splint (Fig. 8-11). A sling is a speciﬁ c kind 
of soft splint that uses a triangular bandage tied to 
support an injured arm, wrist or hand. 
 ■ Rigid splints. Padded boards, folded magazines or 
newspapers, or padded metal strips that do not have 
any sharp edges can serve as splints (Fig. 8-12).
 ■ The ground. An injured leg stretched out on the 
ground is supported by the ground.
FIGURE 8-9 Applying ice can help to control swelling and reduce 
pain.
FIGURE 8-10 An anatomic splint uses a part of the body as the 
splint.
FIGURE 8-11 Folded blankets, towels, pillows or a triangular 
bandage tied as a sling can be used as soft splints.
FIGURE 8-12 Commercially made rigid splints are available 
(shown), but many items, such as padded boards or folded 
newspapers, can be used.
 

--- Page 135 ---
  CHAPTER  8    |    Injuries to Muscles, Bones and Joints 123
After you have splinted the injury, apply ice to the 
injured area. Keep the person from getting chilled or 
overheated and be reassuring. 
Head, Neck and Spinal Injuries
Although head, neck and spinal injuries make up only 
a small fraction of all injuries, these injuries may be life 
threatening or cause permanent life-altering damage. 
Each year, approximately 12,000 Americans suffer 
a spinal cord injury. Most are male victims with an 
average age of about 40 years. The leading causes of 
spinal cord injuries are motor vehicle crashes, followed 
by falls, violence and sports (Fig. 8-13). 
Injuries to the head, neck or spine can cause paralysis, 
speech or memory problems or other disabling 
conditions. These injuries can damage bone and soft 
tissue, including the brain and spinal cord. Since 
generally only x-rays, CAT scans or MRIs can show the 
severity of a head, neck or spinal injury, you should 
always care for such injuries as if they were serious.
An injury to the brain can cause bleeding inside the skull 
(Fig. 8-14). The blood can build up and cause pressure, 
resulting in more damage. The ﬁ rst and most important 
signal of brain injury is a change in the person’s level of 
consciousness. He or she may be dizzy or confused or 
may become unconscious.
The spine is a strong, ﬂ  exible column of small bones 
that support the head and trunk (Fig. 8-15, A–C). The 
spinal cord runs through the circular openings of the 
small bones called the vertebrae. The 
vertebrae are separated from each 
other by cushions of cartilage called 
disks. Nerves originating in the brain 
form branches extending to various 
parts of the body through openings in 
the vertebrae. Injuries to the spine can 
fracture vertebrae and tear ligaments. In 
some cases, the vertebrae can shift and 
cut or squeeze the spinal cord. This can 
paralyze the person or be life threatening.
What to Look For
When you encounter an injured person, 
try to determine if there is a head, neck 
or spinal injury. Think about whether 
the forces involved were great enough 
to cause one of these injuries. Someone 
may have fallen from a signiﬁ cant 
height or struck his or her head while 
diving. He or she might have been in a 
motor vehicle crash and had not been 
wearing a safety belt. Maybe the person 
was thrown from the vehicle. Perhaps 
the person was struck by lightning, or 
maybe a bullet that pierced his or her 
back struck the spine. Always suspect 
FIGURE 8-13 The leading causes of spinal cord injuries are motor vehicle crashes, followed 
by falls, violence and sports.
Common Causes of Spinal Cord Injury
Other/Unknown
8.5%
Sports Injuries
7.9%
Acts of 
Violence
15.0 %
Falls
27.3%
Vehicular
41.3%
Source: National Spinal Cord Injury Statistical Center 2010
FIGURE 8-14 Injuries to the head 
can rupture blood vessels in the brain. 
Pressure builds within the skull as blood 
accumulates, causing brain injury.
 

--- Page 136 ---
124  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
a head, neck or spinal injury if a person 
is unconscious and/or if his or her safety 
helmet is broken.
You also should suspect a head, neck or 
spinal injury if the injured person:
 ■ Was involved in a motor vehicle crash or 
subjected to another signiﬁ cant force.
 ■ Was injured as a result of a fall from 
greater than a standing height.
 ■ Is wearing a safety helmet that is broken.
 ■ Complains of neck or back pain.
 ■ Has tingling or weakness in the 
extremities.
 ■ Is not fully alert.
 ■ Appears to be intoxicated.
 ■ Appears to be frail or older than 65 years.
 ■ Is a child younger than 3 years with 
evidence of a head or neck injury.
When to Call 9-1-1
If you think a person has a head, neck 
or spinal injury, call 9-1-1 or the local 
emergency number.
What to Do Until Help Arrives
While you are waiting for emergency medical 
services (EMS) personnel to arrive, the best 
care you can give is to minimize movement 
of the person’s head, neck and spine. As 
long as the person is breathing normally, 
support the head and neck in the position 
FIGURE 8-15, A–C A, Vertebrae are separated by cushions of cartilage called disks. 
B, The spine is divided into ﬁ ve regions. C, Traumatic injury to a region of the spine can 
paralyze speciﬁ  c body parts.
Spinal cord
Vertebrae
Nerve branches
Intervertebral
disk
C1
C2
C3
C4
C5
C6
C7
T1
T2
T3
T4
T5
T6
T7
T10
T11
T12
L1
L2
L3
L4
L5
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
Sacrum
5 fused vertebrae
Coccyx
4 fused vertebrae
7
Cervical
12
Thoracic
5
Lumbar
9
Sacrum
and Coccyx
A B C
 

--- Page 137 ---
  CHAPTER  8    |    Injuries to Muscles, Bones and Joints 125
found. Do this by placing your hands on both sides of the 
person’s head in the position in which you found it. Support 
the person’s head in that position until EMS personnel take 
over supporting the person’s head (Fig. 8-16). If the head is 
sharply turned to one side, do not move it. Support the head 
and neck in the position found.
If a person with a suspected head, neck or spinal 
injury is wearing a helmet, do not remove it unless 
you are speciﬁ  cally trained to do so and it is necessary 
to assess or access the person’s airway. Minimize 
movement using the same manual technique you 
would use if the person were not wearing headgear.
The person may become confused, drowsy or 
unconscious. Breathing may stop. The person may be 
bleeding. If the person is unconscious, keep the airway 
open and check breathing. You should take steps to 
control severe bleeding and keep the person from 
getting chilled or overheated. 
Concussion
A concussion is a type of brain injury that involves 
a temporary loss of brain function resulting from a 
blow to the head. A person with a concussion may not 
always lose consciousness. The effects of a concussion 
can appear immediately or very soon after the blow 
to the head and include sleep, mood and cognitive 
disturbances, and sensitivity to light and noise. 
However, some effects do not appear for hours or even 
days and may last for several days or even longer.
When to Call 9-1-1
Every suspected concussion should be treated 
seriously—call 9-1-1 or the local emergency number.
What to Look For
Signals of a concussion include:
 ■ Confusion, which may last from moments to 
several minutes.
 ■ Headache.
 ■ Repeated questioning about what happened.
 ■ Temporary memory loss, especially for periods 
immediately before and after the injury.
 ■ Brief loss of consciousness.
 ■ Nausea and vomiting.
 ■ Speech problems (patient is unable to answer 
questions or obey simple commands).
 ■ Blurred vision or light sensitivity.
What to Do Until Help Arrives
To care for a person with a suspected concussion:
 ■ Support the head and neck in the position in which 
you found it.
 ■ Maintain an open airway.
 ■ Control any bleeding and apply dressings to any 
open wounds. 
 ■ Do not apply direct pressure if there are any signs of 
an obvious skull fracture. 
 ■ If there is clear ﬂ uid leaking from the ears or a wound 
in the scalp, cover the area loosely with a sterile gauze 
dressing. 
 ■ Monitor the person for any changes in condition. 
 ■ Try to calm and reassure the person. Encourage 
the person to talk with you; it may prevent loss of 
consciousness.
Chest Injuries
Injuries to the chest may be caused by falls, sports 
mishaps or crushing or penetrating forces. Chest 
injuries range from a simple broken rib to serious 
life-threatening injuries. 
What to Look For
Although painful, a simple broken rib rarely is life 
threatening. A person with a broken rib generally 
remains calm. However, a person with a broken rib 
will take small, shallow breaths because normal or 
deep breathing is uncomfortable or painful. The person 
usually will attempt to ease the pain by supporting the 
injured area with a hand or arm. 
If the injury is serious, the person will have trouble 
breathing. The person’s skin may appear ﬂ ushed, pale 
or ashen and he or she may cough up blood. Remember 
that a person with a serious chest injury also may have a 
spinal injury.
Broken ribs are less common in children because 
children’s ribs are more ﬂ exible and tend to bend rather 
than break. However, the forces that can cause a broken 
rib in adults can severely bruise the lung tissue of 
children, which can be a life-threatening injury. Look for 
signals, such as what caused the injury, bruising on the 
chest and trouble breathing, to determine if a child has 
potential chest injury.
FIGURE 8-16 Place your hands on both sides of the person’s 
head and support it in the position in which you found it until EMS 
personnel take over.
 

--- Page 138 ---
126  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
When to Call 9-1-1
If you think that the injury is serious, involves trouble 
breathing or the spine also has been injured, do not 
move the person and call 9-1-1 or the local emergency 
number. If the person is standing, do not have the 
person lie down. Continue to watch the person and 
minimize movement until EMS personnel take over. 
What to Do Until Help Arrives
If you suspect injured or broken ribs, have the person 
rest in a position that will make breathing easier. 
Binding the person’s upper arm to the chest on the 
injured side will help to support the injured area and 
make breathing more comfortable. You can use an 
object, such as a pillow or rolled blanket, to support and 
immobilize the area (Fig. 8-17). Monitor breathing and 
skin condition, and take steps to minimize shock.
Pelvic Injuries
The large, heavy bones of the hip make up the pelvis. 
Like the chest, injury to the pelvic bones can range from 
simple to life threatening. 
What to Look For
An injury to the pelvis may be serious or life threatening 
because of the risk of damage to major arteries or 
internal organs. Fractures of bones in this area may 
cause severe internal bleeding. Signals of a pelvic injury 
include the following:
 ■ Severe pain.
 ■ Bruising.
 ■ Possible external bleeding.
 ■ Nausea.
 ■ Vomiting (which may include blood).
 ■ Weakness.
 ■ Thirst.
 ■ Tenderness or a tight feeling in the abdomen.
 ■ Possible loss of sensation in the legs or inability 
to move the legs.
Be alert for the signals of shock, which could indicate 
internal bleeding and/or blood loss. Signals 
of shock include:
 ■ Nausea and vomiting
 ■ Restlessness or irritability.
 ■ Altered level of consciousness.
 ■ Pale, ashen or grayish, cool, moist skin.
 ■ Rapid breathing and pulse.
When to Call 9-1-1
Call 9-1-1 or the local emergency number if you suspect 
a pelvic injury.
What to Do Until Help Arrives
Because an injury to the pelvis also can involve 
injury to the lower spine, it is best not to move the 
person. If possible, try to keep the person lying 
ﬂ at. Watch for signals of internal bleeding and 
take steps to minimize shock until EMS personnel 
take over. 
PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER
Most of the time, injuries to muscles, bones and 
joints are painful but not life threatening. Be 
prepared to recognize signals of these types of 
injuries. The general care for a muscle, bone or 
joint injury is to minimize movement of the injured 
area, follow the RICE mnemonic and make sure 
that the person gets medical care in a timely 
manner. 
Although head, neck and spinal injuries make up only 
a small fraction of all injuries, these injuries may be life 
threatening or cause permanent life-altering damage. 
Recognizing signals of these types of injuries, calling 
9-1-1 or the local emergency number and knowing 
how to give proper care could save a life or prevent 
further injury. 
FIGURE 8-17 Use an object, such as a pillow or rolled blanket, to 
support and immobilize the injured area.
 

--- Page 139 ---
  CHAPTER  8    |    Injuries to Muscles, Bones and Joints 127
SKILL SHEET
APPLYING AN ANATOMIC SPLINT
AFTER CHECKING THE SCENE AND THE INJURED PERSON:
  GET CONSENT 
  SUPPORT INJURED PART 
Support both above and below the site of the injury.
  CHECK CIRCULATION 
Check for feeling, warmth and color 
beyond the injury.
  POSITION BANDAGES 
Place several folded triangular bandages 
above and below the injured body part.
 Continued on next page
 

--- Page 140 ---
128  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
SKILL SHEET continued
  ALIGN BODY PARTS 
Place the uninjured body part next to 
the injured body part.
  TIE BANDAGES SECUREL Y 
  RECHECK CIRCULATION 
Recheck for feeling, warmth and color.
TIP: If you are not able to check warmth and color 
because a sock or shoe is in place, check for feeling.
 

--- Page 141 ---
  CHAPTER  8    |    Injuries to Muscles, Bones and Joints 129
APPL YING A SOFT SPLINT
SKILL SHEET
AFTER CHECKING THE SCENE AND THE INJURED PERSON:
  GET CONSENT 
  SUPPORT INJURED PART 
Support both above and below the site of the injury.
  CHECK CIRCULATION 
Check for feeling, warmth and color 
beyond the injury.
  POSITION BANDAGES
Place several folded triangular bandages 
above and below the injured body part.
 Continued on next page
 

--- Page 142 ---
130  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
SKILL SHEET continued
  WRAP WITH SOFT OBJECT 
Gently wrap a soft object (e.g., a folded blanket or pillow) 
around the injured body part.
  TIE BANDAGES SECUREL Y 
  RECHECK CIRCULATION 
Recheck for feeling, warmth and color.
TIP: If you are not able to check warmth and color 
because a sock or shoe is in place, check for feeling.
 

--- Page 143 ---
  CHAPTER  8    |    Injuries to Muscles, Bones and Joints 131
SKILL SHEET
APPLYING A RIGID SPLINT
AFTER CHECKING THE SCENE AND THE INJURED PERSON:
  GET CONSENT 
  SUPPORT INJURED PART 
Support both above and below the site of the injury.
  CHECK CIRCULATION 
Check for feeling, warmth and color 
beyond the injury.
  PLACE SPLINT 
Place an appropriately sized rigid splint 
(e.g., padded board) under the injured body part.
TIP: Place padding such as roller gauze under the 
palm of the hand to keep it in a natural position. 
Continued on next page
 

--- Page 144 ---
132  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
  SECURE BANDAGES 
Tie several folded triangular bandages above 
and below the injured body part.
  RECHECK CIRCULATION 
Recheck for feeling, warmth and color.
SKILL SHEET continued
TIP: If a rigid splint is used on an injured forearm, immobilize 
the wrist and elbow. Bind the arm to the chest using folded 
triangular bandages or apply a sling. If splinting an injured 
joint, immobilize the bones on either side of the joint.
 

--- Page 145 ---
  CHAPTER  8    |    Injuries to Muscles, Bones and Joints 133
SKILL SHEET
APPL YING A SLING AND BINDER
AFTER CHECKING THE SCENE AND THE INJURED PERSON:
  GET CONSENT 
  SUPPORT INJURED PART 
Support both above and below the site of the injury.
  CHECK CIRCULATION 
Check for feeling, warmth and color 
beyond the injury.
  POSITION SLING 
Place a triangular bandage under the injured arm 
and over the uninjured shoulder to form a sling.
 Continued on next page
 

--- Page 146 ---
134  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
  SECURE SLING 
Tie the ends of the sling at the side of the neck.
  BIND WITH BANDAGE
Bind the injured body part to the chest with a folded 
triangular bandage.
  RECHECK CIRCULATION 
Recheck for feeling, warmth and color.
SKILL SHEET continued
TIP: Pad the knots at the neck and side of the binder 
for comfort.
 

--- Page 147 ---
  CHAPTER  9    |    Special Situations and Circumstances 135
 Special Situations 
and Circumstances
CHAPTER   9
I
n an emergency, it is helpful to be aware of any unique needs and considerations of the person involved. For 
example, children, older adults, persons with disabilities and persons who speak a different language than your own 
have special needs and considerations that affect the care you give. In some emergencies, special circumstances, 
such as an emergency childbirth or a hostile situation, create additional challenges. In any case, there are steps you can 
take to be better prepared to respond appropriately.
In this chapter, you will explore ways to recognize and respond to special situations and circumstances. This will help 
you to better understand the nature of the emergency and give appropriate, effective care.

--- Page 148 ---
136  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
CHILDREN AND INFANTS
Children and infants have unique needs that require 
special care. For example, checking the condition of a 
conscious child or infant can be difﬁ cult, especially if 
the child does not know you. At certain ages, children 
and infants do not readily accept strangers. Very young 
children and in fants cannot tell you what is wrong. 
Communication
We tend to react more strongly and emotionally to a 
child who is in pain or terriﬁ ed. In such a situation, 
try hard to remain calm and avoid showing panic or 
fear through your actions, speech or facial expressions. 
Doing so will help both the child and concerned adults. 
To help an injured or ill child, try to imagine how the 
child might feel. A child is afraid of the unknown. This 
includes being ill or hurt, touched by strangers and 
being separated from his or her parents. Try not to 
separate the child or infant from loved ones, if possible. 
Often a parent will be holding a crying child or an infant, 
in which case, you perform your assessment while the 
adult continues to hold him or her.
How you interact with an injured or ill child or infant is 
very important. You need to reduce the child’s anxiety 
and panic and gain the child’s trust and cooperation, 
if possible. Approach the child slowly. Your sudden 
appearance may upset the child or infant. Get as close 
to eye level of the child or infant as you can and keep 
your voice calm (Fig. 9-1). Smile at the child. Ask the 
child’s name and use it when you talk with him or her. 
Talk slowly and dis tinctly, and use words the child will 
easily under stand. Ask questions that the child will be 
able to an swer easily. Explain to the child and the parent 
what you are going to do. Reassure the child that you are 
there to help and will not leave.
To be able to effectively check children and infants, it is 
helpful to be aware of certain characteristics of children in 
speciﬁ  c age groups. It also is important to communicate 
effectively with parents. In addition, your care will be 
more effective if you know how to address the speciﬁ c 
communication issues of a child with special needs. 
Characteristics of Children and Infants 
Children up to 1 year of age are commonly referred to 
as infants. Infants younger than 6 months are relatively 
easy to approach and are unlikely to be fearful of 
strangers. However, older infants often show “stranger 
anxiety.” They may turn away from you, cry and cling to 
their parent. If the parent is calm and cooperative, ask 
for his or her assistance. Try to check the infant while he 
or she is held by or seated in the parent’s lap. 
One- and 2-year-old children commonly are referred 
to as toddlers. Toddlers may not cooperate with your 
attempts to check them. They usually are con cerned 
about being separated from a loved one. If you reassure 
the toddler that he or she will not be separated from the 
parent, the toddler may be comforted. If possible, give 
the toddler a few minutes to get used to you before 
at tempting to check him or her, and check the toddler in 
the parent’s lap. A toddler also may respond to praise or 
be comforted by holding a special toy or blanket. 
Three- to 5-year-old children commonly are referred 
to as preschoolers. Children in this age group usually 
are easy to check if you make use of their natural 
curiosity. Allow them to inspect items such as bandages. 
Opportunities to explore can reduce children’s fears and 
distract them while you are checking them and giving 
care. Reassure the child that you are going to help and 
will not leave him or her. Some times you can show what 
you are going to do on a stuffed animal or doll (Fig. 9-2). 
If the child is injured, he or she may be upset by seeing 
FIGURE 9-1 To communicate with a child, get as close to eye level 
as you can.
FIGURE 9-2 Demonstrating ﬁ  rst aid steps on a stuffed animal or doll 
helps a child to understand how you will care for him or her.
 

--- Page 149 ---
  CHAPTER  9    |    Special Situations and Circumstances 137
the cut or injury, so cover it with a dressing as soon 
as possible. 
School-age children are between 6 and 12 years of age. 
They often are more comfortable speaking with adults 
and can be a good source of information concerning 
what happened. Usually you can talk readily with 
school-age chil dren. However, do not expect a child 
to always behave in a way that is consistent with his 
or her chronological age. Be especially careful not to 
“talk down” to school-age children. Let them know 
if you are going to do anything that may be painful. 
Children in this age group are becoming conscious of 
their bodies and may not like exposure. Respect their 
modesty. 
Children between 13 and 18 years of age are considered 
adolescents. Typically they behave more like adults 
than children. Direct your questions to the adolescent 
rather than to a parent but allow input from a parent. 
Adolescents are modest and often react better to a 
responder of the same gender. 
Interacting with Parents, Guardians 
and Caregivers 
If the family is excited or agitated, the child is likely to 
be so. When you can calm the family, the child often 
will calm down as well. Remember to get con sent to 
give care from any adult responsible for the child when 
possible. Concerned adults need your support too, so 
behave as calmly as possible. 
Communicating with Children Who Have 
Special Health Care Needs
When communicating with children and parents, 
remember to observe the whole situation and ask 
questions to determine if the child has special physical 
or developmental needs. 
If the child has special needs, ask the parent or 
caregiver if there is a list summarizing vital emergency 
information such as any unique or speciﬁ c care 
procedures associated with the child’s condition or 
allergies and other medical problems or issues. 
Generally, the parents and caregivers can give you the 
best information since they are the most familiar with 
any medical equipment needed by the child. 
When you attempt to communicate with children who 
have a developmental disability, the child’s age and 
developmental level may not be obvious. Do not assume 
the child has a mental disability because he or she is 
unable to express thoughts or words. Ask the parents 
what the child is capable of understanding. Speak 
directly to the child. Do not speak to the parents as if the 
child is not in the room. 
Observing Children and Infants 
You can obtain a lot of information by observing 
children or infants before actually touching them. 
Look for signals that indicate changes in the level 
of consciousness, trouble breathing, and apparent 
injuries and conditions. Realize that the situation 
may change as soon as you touch the child 
or infant because he or she may become anxious 
or up set. 
Unlike some injured or ill adults, a child or an infant is 
unlikely to try to cover up or deny how he or she feels. 
A child or an infant in pain, for example, generally will 
let you know that he or she hurts and will point out the 
source of the pain. 
Ask a young child to point to any place that hurts. 
An older child can tell you the location of painful 
areas. If you need to hold an in fant, always support 
the head when you pick up the infant. If a child 
becomes extremely upset, conduct your check 
from toe to head instead of head to toe. For more 
information on checking a child or an infant see 
Chapter 1.
Common Childhood Injuries and 
Illnesses 
Certain problems are unique to children, such as speciﬁ c 
kinds of injury and illness. The following sections 
highlight some of these concerns. 
Abdominal Pain
Abdominal pain in children can be the signal of a large 
range of conditions. Fortunately, most are not serious 
and usually go away on their own.
What to Look For
Abdominal pain accompanied by any of the following 
signals could indicate that the child is suffering from a 
serious condition or illness: 
 ■ A sudden onset of severe abdominal pain or pain that 
becomes worse with time
 ■ Excessive vomiting or diarrhea
 ■ Blood in the vomit or stool
 ■ Bloated or swollen abdomen
 ■ A change in the child’s level of consciousness, such as 
drowsiness or confusion
 ■ Signals of shock
When to Call 9-1-1 
Call 9-1-1 or the local emergency number if you think the 
child has a life-threatening condition.
 

--- Page 150 ---
138  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
What to Do Until Help Arrives
 ■ Help the child rest in a comfortable position.
 ■ Keep the child from becoming chilled or 
overheated.
 ■ Comfort and reassure the child.
 ■ Give care based on any conditions found.
Child Abuse
At some point, you may encounter a situation in volving 
an injured child in which you have reason to suspect child 
abuse. Child abuse is the physical, psychological or sexual 
assault of a child resulting in injury and emotional trauma. 
Child abuse in volves an injury or a pattern of injuries that 
do not result from an accident. Child neglect is a type 
of child abuse in which the parent or guardian fails to 
provide the necessary age-appropriate care to a child. 
What to Look For
The signals of child abuse include:
 ■ An injury whose cause does not ﬁ t the explanation of 
the parent, guardian or caregiver.
 ■ Obvious or suspected fractures in a child younger 
than 2 years.
 ■ Any unexplained fractures. 
 ■ Injuries in various stages of healing, especially bruises 
and burns.
 ■ Bruises and burns in unusual shapes, such as bruises 
shaped like belt buckles or handprints or burns the 
size of a cigarette tip.
 ■ Unexplained lacerations or abrasions, especially to 
the mouth, lips and eyes.
 ■ Injuries to the genitalia.
 ■ Pain when the child sits down.
 ■ A larger number of injuries than is common for a 
child of the same age.
The signals of child neglect include:
 ■ Lack of adult supervision.
 ■ A child who looks malnourished.
 ■ An unsafe living environment.
 ■ Untreated chronic illness (e.g., a child with asthma 
who has no medications).
Giving Care
When caring for a child who may have been abused or 
neglected, your ﬁ rst priority is to care for the child’s 
injuries or illnesses. An abused child may be frightened, 
hysterical or withdrawn. He or she may be unwilling 
to talk about the incident in an attempt to protect the 
abuser. If you suspect abuse, explain your concerns to 
responding police ofﬁ cers or emergency medical services 
(EMS) personnel if possible. 
If you think you have reasonable cause to believe 
that abuse has occurred, report your suspicions to a 
community or state agency, such as the Department of 
Social Services, the Department of Child and Family 
Services or Child Protective Services. 
You may be afraid to report suspected child abuse 
because you do not wish to get involved or are concerned 
about being sued. However, in most states, when you 
make a report in good faith, you are immune from any 
civil or criminal liability or penalty, even if you made 
a mistake. In this instance, good faith means that you 
honestly believe that abuse has occurred or the potential 
for abuse exists and a prudent and reasonable person in 
the same position would also honestly believe that abuse 
has occurred or the potential for abuse exists. You do not 
need to identify yourself when you report child abuse, 
although your report will have more credibility if you do. 
In some areas, certain professions are legally obligated to 
report suspicions of child abuse such as daycare workers 
or school employees. For more information on reporting 
child abuse at your workplace, contact your supervisor. 
Colic
Colic is a condition in which an otherwise healthy 
infant cries more than 3 hours a day, for more than 
3 days a week, between the ages of 3 weeks and 3 months. 
The crying usually starts suddenly at about the same 
time each day. Colic generally starts to improve at 
about 6 weeks. It often disappears by the time a baby is 
12 weeks old. 
Causes of colic may include intestinal gas, food 
sensitivity or allergy, or an immature nervous system. 
A baby with colic may have a red face and tense, hard 
belly because the stomach muscles tighten during 
crying. A baby with colic also may clench his or her 
legs, feet and ﬁ sts when crying. 
Giving Care 
Movement, including walking and driving in a car, may 
help. White noise, such as the sound of a vacuum in the 
next room or the clothes dryer, also may be helpful. You 
also can hold the baby using certain techniques to help 
relieve gas pain. Consult your health care provider to 
rule out more serious medical conditions. 
Conjunctivitis
Conjunctivitis is commonly known as “pink eye.” It is 
a common childhood eye infection that is contagious. 
Signals, found in one or both eyes, include redness, 
swelling, itchiness, a gritty feeling, tearing and a 
discharge that forms a crust during the night. Seek 
care from a health care provider as soon as possible for 
diagnosis. Medication is necessary when the cause of the 
infection is bacterial.
 

--- Page 151 ---
  CHAPTER  9    |    Special Situations and Circumstances 139
Diarrhea and Vomiting
Diarrhea, or loose stools, often accompanies an 
infection in children. Vomiting can be frightening for a 
young child, but it is rarely a serious problem. However, 
diarrhea and vomiting both can lead to dehydration. 
This is more likely to occur in young children. 
When to Seek Professional Medical Care
A health care provider should be contacted if:
 ■ Diarrhea or vomiting persists for more than a few days.
 ■ The child is not replacing lost liquids or cannot 
retain liquids.
 ■ The child has not had a wet diaper in 3 or more hours 
or, if older, has not had any urine output for more 
than 6 hours.
 ■ The child has a high fever.
 ■ The child has bloody or black stools. 
 ■ The child is unusually sleepy, drowsy, unresponsive 
or irritable.
 ■ The child cries without tears or has a dry mouth. 
 ■ The child has a sunken appearance to the abdomen, 
eyes or cheeks, or, in a very young infant, has a 
sunken soft spot at the top of the head.
 ■ The child has skin that remains “tented” if pinched 
and released.
Giving Care
Remember the following when caring for children and 
infants with
 diarrhea:
 ■ If the infant will not tolerate his or her normal 
feedings or if a child is drinking less ﬂ uid than 
normal, add a commercially available oral rehydration 
solution specially designed for children and infants. 
 ■ Do not give over-the-counter anti-diarrhea 
medications to children younger than 2 years. Use 
these with the guidance of the health care provider in 
older children. 
 ■ Maintain the child’s normal diet. Try to limit sugar and 
artiﬁ  cial sweeteners. In addition, encourage the child 
to eat items like bananas, rice, applesauce and toast.
Remember the following when caring for children and 
infants who are vomiting:
 ■ For a very young child or infant, lay the child on his or 
her side so that the child does not swallow or inhale 
the vomit. 
 ■ Halt solid foods for 24 hours during an illness 
involving vomiting and replace with clear ﬂ uids, such 
as water, popsicles, gelatin or an oral rehydration 
solution specially designed for children and infants. 
 ■ Introduce liquids slowly. For instance, wait 2 to 3 
hours after a vomiting episode to offer the child some 
cool water. Offer 1 to 2 ounces every half hour, four 
times. Then alternate 2 ounces of rehydration solution 
with 2 ounces of water every 2 hours. 
 ■ After 12 to 24 hours with no vomiting, gradually 
reintroduce the child’s normal diet. 
Ear Infections
Ear infections are common in young children. Nearly 90 
percent of young children have an ear infection at some 
time before they reach school age. 
What to Look For
Common signals of an ear infection include:
 ■ Pain. Older children can tell you that their ears hurt, 
but younger children may only cry or be irritable or 
tug on the affected ear.
 ■ Loss of appetite.
 ■ Trouble sleeping.
 ■ Fever.
 ■ Ear drainage.
 ■ Trouble hearing.
When to Seek Professional Medical Care
A health care provider should be contacted if:
 ■ The child’s signals last longer than a day.
 ■ You see a discharge of blood or pus from the ear. This 
could indicate a ruptured eardrum.
 ■ The child’s signals do not improve or get worse 
after he or she has been diagnosed by a health care 
provider.
Giving Care
Pain symptoms may be treated with ibuprofen or 
acetaminophen. In children younger than 2 years, 
watch for sleeplessness and irritability during or after 
an upper respiratory infection, such as a cold. Always 
consult the child’s health care provider before giving 
any over-the-counter pain relievers.
Fever
Fever is an elevated body temperature of 100.4°  F 
or greater. Fever indicates a problem, and in a child 
or an infant, it often means there is a speciﬁ  c problem. 
Usually these problems are not life threatening, 
but some can be. A high fever in a child or an infant 
often indicates some form of infection. In a young 
child, even a minor infection can result in a high 
fever, usually deﬁ  ned as a temperature 103°  F 
and above. 
Fevers that last a long time or are very high can 
result in seizures. A febrile seizure is a convulsion 
brought on by a fever in infants or small children. It 
is the most common type of seizure in children. Most 
 

--- Page 152 ---
140  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
febrile seizures last less than 5 minutes and are not 
life threatening. However, there are conditions where 
the child may require additional care (see When to 
Call 9-1-1 for more information on febrile seizures). 
Immediately after a febrile seizure, it is important to 
cool the body if a fever is present (see Chapter 5 for 
more information on signals of and care for seizures).
What to Look For
Older children with fever will often:
 ■ Feel hot to the touch.
 ■ Complain of being cold or chilled. 
 ■ Complain of body aches.
 ■ Have a headache.
 ■ Have trouble sleeping or sleep more than usual.
 ■ Appear drowsy.
 ■ Have no appetite. 
Infants with fever will often:
 ■ Be upset or fussy, with frequent crying.
 ■ Be unusually quiet.
 ■ Feel warm or hot. 
 ■ Breathe rapidly and have a rapid heart rate. 
 ■ Stop eating or sleeping normally. 
Taking a Temperature
If children or infants have any of the signals listed above, 
you will need to take their temperature to determine if 
they have a fever. A rectal temperature gives the most 
reliable reading for children younger than 5 years. 
(NOTE: Before taking a rectal temperature, child 
care providers should make sure that doing so is not 
prohibited by state regulations.)
For children age 5 and older, an oral temperature (in 
the mouth and under the tongue) is the recommended 
method. You also may take an oral temperature for 
children age 3 and older. 
A child’s or an infant’s temperature also can be taken in 
the ear (known as the tympanic method) or under the 
armpit (known as the axillary method). 
Multiple types of thermometers are available. Do 
not use glass thermometers, and, whenever possible, 
use an electronic (digital) thermometer. Also, use a 
thermometer that is speciﬁ cally designed for the type 
of temperature being taken. For example, do not use an 
oral thermometer to take a rectal temperature. Read the 
manufacturer’s directions carefully so you know how to 
use the thermometer appropriately. 
Always stay with a child while taking a temperature 
to make sure that the child does not move so the 
thermometer does not break or cause injury.
When to Call 9-1-1
Call 9-1-1 or the local emergency number if the child or 
infant has signals of life-threatening conditions, such as 
unconsciousness or trouble breathing. Also, call if this 
is the ﬁ rst time that a child has had a febrile seizure, the 
seizure lasts longer than 5 minutes or is repeated, or the 
seizure is followed by a quick rise in the temperature of 
the child or infant. Child care providers should follow 
state or local regulations regarding emergency care 
and contact procedures whenever a child in their care 
becomes injured or ill.
When to Seek Professional Medical Care
A health care provider should be contacted for:
 ■ Any infant younger than 3 months with a fever 
(100.4° F or greater).
 ■ Any child younger than 2 years with a high fever 
(103° F or greater). 
 ■ Any child or infant who has a febrile seizure.
Giving Care
If the child or infant has a fever, make him or her as 
comfortable as possible. Encourage the child to rest. 
Make sure that the child or infant is not overdressed 
or covered with too many blankets. A single layer 
of clothing and a light blanket usually is all that is 
necessary. Make sure that the child or infant drinks clear 
ﬂ uids (e.g., water, juice or chicken broth) or continues 
nursing or bottle-feeding to prevent dehydration. 
Acetaminophen or ibuprofen may be given for a fever. 
Do not give the child aspirin for fever or other signals 
of ﬂ  u-like or other viral illness. For a child, taking 
aspirin can result in an extremely serious medical 
condition called Reye’s syndrome. Reye’s syndrome 
is an illness that affects the brain and other internal 
organs. Always consult the child’s health care provider 
before giving any over-the-counter pain relievers.
If the child has a high fever, it is important to gently cool 
the child. Never rush cooling down a child. If the fever 
is caused a febrile seizure, rapid cooling could bring 
on other complications. Instead, remove any ex cessive 
clothing or blankets and sponge the child with lukewarm 
water. Do not use an ice water bath or rubbing alcohol 
to cool down the body. Both of these approaches are 
dangerous. Continue caring for the child or infant with 
a high fever as described above. 
Foreign Objects in the Nose
If a child has an object in the nose, do not try to 
remove the object. Special lighting and instruments are 
necessary. It is important to go to a health care provider 
for removal of the object. Also, try to calm the child and 
parents as best as possible. 
 

--- Page 153 ---
  CHAPTER  9    |    Special Situations and Circumstances 141
Injury
Injury is the number one cause of death for chil dren in 
the United States. Many of these deaths are the result of 
motor-vehicle crashes. The greatest dangers to a child 
involved in a motor-vehicle crash are airway obstruction 
and bleeding. Severe bleeding must be controlled as 
quickly as possible. A relatively small amount of blood 
lost by an adult is a large amount for a child or an infant 
to lose. 
Because a child’s head is large and heavy in proportion 
to the rest of the body, the head is the area most often 
injured. A child injured as the result of force or a blow 
also may have damage to the organs in the abdominal 
and chest cavities. Such damage can cause severe internal 
bleeding. A child secured only by a lap belt may have 
serious abdominal or spinal injuries in a motor-vehicle 
crash. Try to ﬁ  nd out what happened because a severely 
injured child may not immediately show signals of injury. 
To avoid needless deaths of children caused by motor 
vehicle crashes, laws have been enacted requiring that 
children ride in the backseat of the car in approved 
safety seats or wearing safety belts (see the Appendix: 
Injury Prevention and Emergency Preparedness for 
detailed information on vehicle safety). As a result of 
these laws, more children’s lives have been saved. You 
may have to check and care for an injured child while he 
or she is in a safety seat. A safety seat does not normally 
pose problems while you are checking a child. Leave 
the child in the seat if the seat has not been damaged. 
If the child is to be transported to a medical facility for 
examination, he or she often can be safely secured and 
transported in the safety seat. 
Meningitis
Meningitis is a disease that occurs when the tissues that 
cover the brain and spinal cord become inﬂ amed. It is 
caused by viruses or bacteria. The bacterial form of the 
disease is less common but more serious. 
What to Look For
Signals of meningitis include the following:
 ■ Fever
 ■ Irritability
 ■ Loss of appetite
 ■ Sleepiness
 ■ In addition, older children may complain of a stiff 
neck, back pain or a headache.
When to Seek Professional Medical Care
A health care provider should be contacted if a child has 
been in contact with a person who has been diagnosed 
with bacterial meningitis. The health care provider may 
prescribe preventative antibiotics.
If the child shows any signals of meningitis, go 
immediately to a health care provider. It is important 
to ﬁ nd out whether the illness is caused by bacteria or a 
virus. Bacterial meningitis requires prompt treatment 
with antibiotics. 
There is no medication to treat viral meningitis. 
Give supportive care for the fever and pain with 
acetaminophen or ibuprofen. 
Poisoning 
Poisoning is one of the top 10 causes of unintentional 
death in the United States for adolescents, children 
and infants. 
Children younger than 6 years account for half of 
all exposures to poisonous substances in the United 
States. Children in this age group often are poisoned by 
ingesting household products or medications (typically 
those intended for adults). Although children in this age 
group are exposed more often than any other, only 3 
percent of these cases result in death. 
There has been a decrease in child poisonings in 
recent years due in part to child-resistant packaging 
for medications. This packaging makes it harder for 
children to get into these substances. The decrease also 
is a result of preventive actions taken by parents and 
others who care for children. For more information on 
poisoning, refer to Chapter 5.
Rashes
Young children and infants have sensitive skin. Their 
skin develops rashes easily. Two common rashes in 
young children and infants are heat rash and diaper rash. 
Heat Rash
Heat rash is a red or pink rash that forms on any skin 
covered by clothing. It is most common in infants and 
looks like red dots or small pimples. 
If the child or infant develops heat rash, give care by:
 ■ Removing or loosening clothing to cool down the 
child or infant.
 ■ Moving the child or infant to a cool location.
 ■ Cooling the area with wet washcloths or a cool bath 
and letting the skin air-dry.
If the area remains irritated, use calamine lotion or a 
hydrocortisone cream if the child is not sensitive or 
allergic to these products. Avoid ointments or other 
lotions. They could further irritate the skin. 
Diaper Rash
Diaper rash is another common rash in young children 
and infants. When skin is wet for too long, it begins to 
break down. When wet skin is rubbed, it becomes more 
 

--- Page 154 ---
142  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
damaged. Moisture from a dirty diaper can harm the 
skin of a toddler or infant, making it more irritated. This 
causes diaper rash to develop. 
Seek care from a health care provider if diaper rash:
 ■ Develops blisters or pus-ﬁ lled sores.
 ■ Does not go away within 2 to 3 days.
 ■ Gets worse. 
Give care for diaper rash in toddlers and infants by 
applying a thick layer of over-the-counter zinc oxide or 
petroleum jelly to the affected area. This creates a barrier 
between the infant’s delicate skin and the urine or feces. 
To prevent diaper rash and help it to heal:
 ■ Keep the area as dry as possible by changing wet or 
soiled diapers immediately.
 ■ Clean the area with water and a soft washcloth. Avoid 
wipes that can dry the child’s skin.
 ■ Pat the skin dry or let it air dry.
 ■ Keep the diaper loose so wet and soiled parts do not 
rub against the skin. 
Sudden Infant Death Syndrome
Sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS) is the sudden, 
unexpected and unexplained death of a seemingly 
healthy infant. In the United States, approximately 
2300 infants die every year of SIDS. SIDS is the third 
leading cause of death for infants between 1 month and 
1 year of age. It occurs most often in infants between 
4 weeks and 7 months of age. SIDS usually occurs while 
the infant is sleeping. 
The condition does not seem to be linked to a disease. 
In addition, the cause(s) of SIDS are not yet understood. 
It is not thought to be hereditary, but it does tend to 
recur in families. Because of these factors, there is no 
way of knowing if a child is at risk for SIDS. Sometimes 
it is mistaken for child abuse because of the unexplained 
death in an apparently healthy child. In addition, SIDS 
sometimes causes bruise-like blotches to appear on the 
infant’s body. However, SIDS is not related to child 
abuse. 
When to Call 9-1-1
By the time the infant’s condition has been discovered, he 
or she may be in cardiac arrest. If you encounter an infant 
in this condition, make sure that someone has called 9-1-1 
or the local emergency number or call yourself.
What to Do Until Help Arrives
If there is no breathing, perform CPR until EMS 
personnel take over, an automated external deﬁ brillator 
(AED) becomes available or you see an obvious sign of 
life, such as breathing. 
After a SIDS Incident
An incident involving a severely ill child or infant or one 
who has died can be emotion ally upsetting. After such an 
episode, ﬁ  nd someone whom you trust to talk about the 
experience and express your feelings. If you continue to 
be distressed, seek professional counseling. The feelings 
caused by such incidents need to be dealt with and 
understood or they can result in serious stress reactions. 
EMERGENCY CHILDBIRTH
Words such as exhausting, stressful, exciting, fulﬁ lling, 
painful and scary sometimes are used to describe a 
planned childbirth. A planned childbirth is one that 
occurs in the hospital or at home under the supervision 
of a health care provider. If you ﬁ nd yourself assisting 
with the delivery of a newborn, however, it probably will 
not be happening in a planned situation. Therefore, your 
feelings, as well as those of the expectant mother, may 
be intensiﬁ ed by fear of the unexpected or the possibility 
that something might go wrong.
FOCUS ON PREVENTION
SIDS
Infants who sleep on their stomach at night or naptime 
seem to have an increased risk for SIDS. Therefore, to 
help reduce the risk of SIDS:
 ■ Always place an infant on his or her back at 
night or naptime, using a ﬁ  rm mattress in a 
safety-approved crib or bassinet. 
 ■ Make sure that there is no soft bedding, such 
as pillows, blankets and bumpers, or soft toys, 
such as stuffed animals, in the crib. These 
items could cause suffocation.
 ■ Check the sleeping infant frequently.
 

--- Page 155 ---
  CHAPTER  9    |    Special Situations and Circumstances 143
Take comfort in knowing that things rarely go wrong. 
Childbirth is a natural process. Thousands of children all 
over the world are born without complications each day, 
in areas where no medical care is available.
When to Call 9-1-1
If a woman is giving birth, call 9-1-1 or the local 
emergency number immediately. Give the EMS call 
taker the following important information:
 ■ The woman’s name, age and expected due date 
 ■ How long she has been having labor pains
 ■ Whether this is her ﬁ rst child
What to Do Until Help Arrives 
By following a few simple steps, you can effectively assist 
in the birth process while you wait for EMS personnel to 
arrive. If a woman is giving birth:
 ■ Talk with the woman to help her remain calm. 
 ■ Place layers of clean sheets, towels or blankets under 
her and over her abdomen. 
 ■ Control the scene so that the woman will have privacy.
 ■ Position the woman on her back with her knees bent, 
feet ﬂ  at and legs spread wide apart.
 ■ Avoid contact with body ﬂ uids; wear disposable gloves 
and protective eyewear if possible.
 ■ Remember, the woman delivers the baby, so be 
patient and let it happen naturally.
 ■ The baby will be slippery; use a clean towel to receive 
and hold the baby; avoid dropping the baby. 
 ■ Keep the baby warm; have a clean, warm towel or 
blanket handy to wrap the newborn.
CAUTIONS:
 ■ Do not let the woman get up or leave to ﬁ nd a 
bathroom (most women want to use the restroom).
 ■ Do not hold the woman’s knees together; this will not 
slow the birth process and may complicate the birth 
or harm the baby.
 ■ Do not place your ﬁ ngers in the vagina for any reason. 
 ■ Do not pull on the baby.
OLDER ADULTS
Older adults, or the elderly, generally are considered to 
be those older than 65 years. They are quickly becoming 
the fastest growing age group in the United States. Since 
1900, life expectancy in the United States has increased 
by over 60 percent. In 1900, for example, the average life 
expectancy was 46 years for men and 48 years for women. 
Today, it is 75 years for men and 80 years for women. The 
main explanations for the increase in life expectancy are 
medical advancements and improvements in health care.
Normal aging brings about changes. People age at 
different rates, and each person’s organs and body parts 
age at different rates as well. For example, a person with 
wrinkled, fragile skin may have strong bones or excellent 
respiratory function. 
Overall, however, body function generally de clines as 
we age. Some changes begin as early as age 30 years. 
The lungs become less efﬁ cient, so older people are at 
higher risk of developing pneu monia and other lung 
diseases. The amount of blood pumped by the heart 
with each beat de creases, and the heart rate slows. 
The blood vessels harden, causing increased work for 
the heart. Hearing and vision usually decline, often 
causing some degree of sight and hearing loss. Reﬂ exes 
become slower, and arthritis may affect joints, causing 
movement to become painful.
Checking an Older Adult
The physical and mental changes associated with aging 
may require you to adapt your way of communicating 
and to be aware of certain potential age-related 
conditions, such as hearing loss. 
To check an injured or ill older adult, attempt to learn the 
person’s name and use it when you speak to him or her. 
Consider using “Mrs.,” “Mr.” or “Ms.” as a sign of respect. 
Make sure that you are at the person’s eye level so that he 
or she can see and hear you more clearly (Fig. 9-3). 
If the person seems confused at ﬁ rst, the confusion 
may be the result of impaired vision or hearing. If he 
or she usually wears eyeglasses and cannot ﬁ nd them, 
try to locate them. Speak slowly and clearly, and look 
at the person’s face while you talk. Notice if he or she 
has a hearing aid. Someone who needs glasses to see 
or a hearing aid to hear is likely to be very anxious 
without them. If the person is truly confused, try to 
ﬁ nd out if the confusion is the result of the injury or an 
FIGURE 9-3 Speak to an elderly person at eye level so that he or 
she can see and hear you more clearly.
 

--- Page 156 ---
144  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
existing condition. Be sure to get as much information 
as possible from family members or bystanders. 
The person may be afraid of falling, so if he or she is 
standing, offer an arm or hand. Remember that an older 
person may need to move slowly. 
Try to ﬁ nd out what medications the person is taking 
so that you can tell EMS personnel. Look for a medical 
identiﬁ cation (ID) tag, bracelet or necklace that lists 
the person’s name, address and medical information. 
Be aware that an elderly person may not recognize the 
signals of a serious condition. An elderly person also 
may minimize any signals for fear of losing his or her 
inde pendence or being placed in a nursing home. 
Common Injuries and Illnesses 
in Older Adults 
Certain problems are more prevalent in older adults, 
such as speciﬁ c kinds of injury and illness. The following 
sections discuss some of these concerns. 
Confusion 
Older adults are at increased risk of altered thinking 
patterns and confusion. Some of this change is the result 
of aging. Certain diseases, such as Alzheimer’s disease, 
affect the brain, resulting in im paired memory and 
thinking and altered behavior. Confusion that comes on 
suddenly, however, may be the result of medication, even 
a medication the person has been taking regularly. An 
injured or ill person who has problems seeing or hearing 
also may become confused when injured or ill. This 
problem increases when the person is in an unfamiliar 
environment. A head injury also can result in confusion. 
Confusion can be a signal of a medical emergency. An 
elderly person with pneumonia, for example, may not 
run a fever, have chest pain or be coughing, but because 
not enough oxygen is reaching the brain, the person 
may be confused. An older person can have a serious 
infection without fever, pain or nausea. An elderly 
person having a heart attack may not have chest pain, 
pale or ashen skin or other classic signals but may be 
restless, short of breath and confused. 
Depression is common in older adults. A depressed 
older adult may seem to be confused initially. A person 
suffering from depression also may show signals that 
have no apparent cause, such as sudden shortness of 
breath or chest pain. Whatever the reason for any the 
confusion, be respectful and do not talk down to or treat 
him or her like a child. 
Falls
Older adults are at increased risk of falls. In fact, 
falls are the leading cause of death from injury for 
older adults. 
Falls in older adults are due to slower reﬂ exes, failing 
eyesight and hearing, arthritis and problems such as 
unsteady balance and movement. Falls frequently result 
in fractures because the bones become weaker and more 
brittle with age. 
Head Injuries
An older adult is at greater risk of serious head injury. 
As we age, the size of the brain decreases. This decrease 
results in more space between the surface of the brain and 
the inside of the skull. This space allows more movement 
of the brain within the skull, which can increase the 
likelihood of serious head injury. Occasionally, an older 
adult may not develop the signals of a head injury until 
days after a fall. Therefore, unless you know the cause of a 
behavior change, you should always suspect a head injury 
as a possible cause of unusual behavior in an elderly 
person. This is especially true if you know that the person 
had a fall or a blow to the head. 
Problems with Heat and Cold
An elderly person is more susceptible to extremes 
in temperature. The person may be unable to feel 
temperature extremes because his or her body may no 
longer regulate temperature effectively. Body temperature 
may change rapidly to a dangerously high or low level.
The body of an elderly person retains heat be cause of a 
decreased ability to sweat and the re duced ability of the 
circulatory system to adjust to heat. This can lead to heat 
exhaustion or heat stroke.
An elderly person may become chilled and suffer 
hypothermia simply by sitting in a draft or in front 
of a fan or air conditioner. Hypothermia can occur at 
any time of the year. People can go on for several days 
suffering from mild hypothermia without realizing it. 
The older person with mild hypothermia will want to 
lie down frequently; however, this will lower the body 
temperature even further.
Giving Care for a Heat-Related Illness
See Chapter 6 for information about caring for 
heat-related illnesses.
Giving Care for a Cold-Related Emergency
See Chapter 6 for information about caring for 
cold-related emergencies.
PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES
According to the American with Disabilities Act (ADA), 
a person with a disability is someone who has a physical 
or mental impairment that substantially limits one 
or more major life activities such as walking, talking, 
seeing, hearing or learning. This includes, for example, 
 

--- Page 157 ---
  CHAPTER  9    |    Special Situations and Circumstances 145
a blind person who cannot read information posted on 
a bulletin board or a deaf person who may need a sign 
language interpreter.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) 
estimates that over 33 million people in the United 
States have disabilities. When giving care to people with 
disabilities, communication can be a challenge. It may 
be difﬁ  cult to ﬁ nd out what has happened and what 
might be wrong in an emergency situation. 
Physical Disability
A person is considered to have a physical disability if 
his or her ability to move (also called motor function) 
is impaired. A person also is considered to have a 
physically disability if his or her sensory function is 
impaired. Sensory function includes all of the senses: 
sight, hearing, taste, smell and touch. A person with 
a physical disability may have impairments in motor 
function, sensory function or both. 
General hints for approaching an injured or ill person 
whom you suspect may have a physical disability include: 
 ■ Speak to the person before touching him or her. 
 ■ Ask, “How can I help?” or “Do you need help?” 
 ■ Ask for assistance and information from the person 
who has the disability—he or she has been living with 
the disability and best under stands it. If you are not 
able to communicate with the person, ask family 
members, friends or companions who are available 
to help. 
 ■ Do not remove any braces, canes, other physical 
support, eyeglasses or hearing aids. Removal of these 
items may take away necessary physical support for 
the person’s body. 
 ■ Look for a medical ID tag, bracelet or necklace at the 
person’s wrist or neck. 
 ■ A person with a disability may have a service animal, 
such as a guide or signal dog. Be aware that this animal 
may be protective of the person in an emergency 
situation. Allow the animal to stay with the person if 
possible, which will help to reassure both of them.
Deaf and Hard of Hearing 
Hearing loss is deﬁ ned as a partial or total loss of 
hearing. Some people are born with a hearing loss. 
Hearing loss also can result from an injury or illness 
affecting the ear, the nerves leading from the brain to the 
ear or the brain itself. You may not immediately realize 
that the injured or ill person has a hearing loss. Often 
the person will tell you, either in speech or by pointing 
to the ear and shaking the head no. Some people carry a 
card stating that they have a hearing loss. You may see a 
hearing aid in a person’s ear. 
The biggest obstacle you must overcome in car ing for a 
person with a hearing loss is communication. You will 
need to ﬁ gure out how to get that person’s consent to 
give care, and you will need to assess the problem. 
Sometimes the injured or ill person will be able to 
read lips. To assist him or her, position yourself where 
the person can clearly see your face. Look straight at 
the person while you speak, and speak slowly. Do not 
exaggerate the way you form words. Do not turn your 
face away while you speak. Many people with a hearing 
impairment, however, do not read lips. In these cases, 
using gestures and writing messages on paper may be 
the most effective way to communicate.
If you and the person know sign language, use it. 
Some people who are deaf or hard of hearing have a 
machine called a telecommunications device for the 
deaf (TDD). You can use this device to type messages 
and questions, and the person can type replies back to 
you (Fig. 9-4, A–B). Many people who have a hearing 
FIGURE 9-4, A–B Communicate with a person who has a hearing loss in the best way possible. A, Use sign language, lip reading or writing to 
communicate. B, You may also use a telecommunications device for the deaf. 
A
 B
 

--- Page 158 ---
146  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
impairment can speak, some distinctly, some not so 
clearly. If you have trouble understanding, ask the 
person to repeat what he or she said. Do not pretend 
to understand. 
Blind or Visually Impaired
Vision loss is a partial or total loss of sight. Vision loss 
can have many causes. Some people are born with vision 
loss. Others lose vision as a result of dis ease or injury. 
Vision loss is not necessarily a prob lem with the eyes. 
It can result from problems with the vision centers in 
the brain. 
It is no more difﬁ cult to communicate verbally with a 
person who has a partial or total loss of sight than with 
someone who can see. You do not need to speak loudly 
or in overly simple terms. The person may not be able to 
tell you certain things about how an injury occurred but 
usually can give an accurate account based on his or her 
interpretation of sound and touch. 
When caring for a person with vision loss, help to 
reassure him or her by explaining what is going on 
and what you are doing. If you must move a visually 
impaired person who can walk, stand beside the 
person and have him or her hold onto your arm. 
Walk at a normal pace, alert the person to obstacles 
in the way, such as stairs, and let the person know 
whether to step up or down. If the person has a 
service animal, try to keep them together. Ask the 
person to tell you how to handle the dog or ask him 
or her to do it. 
Motor Impairment 
A person with motor impairment is unable to move 
normally. He or she may be missing a body part or have 
a problem with the bones or muscles or the nerves that 
control movement. Causes of motor im pairment could 
include stroke, muscular dystrophy, mul tiple sclerosis, 
paralysis, cerebral palsy or loss of a limb. 
Determining which problems are pre-existing and 
which are the result of immediate injury or illness can 
be difﬁ  cult. Care for all problems you detect as if they 
are new.
Mental Impairment 
Mental, or cognitive, function includes the brain’s 
capacity to reason and process information. A person 
with a mental impairment has problems per forming 
these operations. Some types of mental impairment are 
genetic. Others result from injuries or infections that 
occur during pregnancy, shortly after birth or later in 
life. Some causes never are determined. 
In some situations, you will not be able to determine 
if a person has a mental impairment; in others, it will 
be obvious. If you suspect that a person has a mental 
impairment, approach him or her as you would any 
other person in his or her age group. If the person 
appears not to understand you, rephrase what you 
were saying in simpler terms. Listen carefully to what 
the person says. An injury or a sudden illness can be 
disruptive to some individuals who have a cognitive 
impairment, causing them a great deal of anxiety and 
fear. Take time to explain who you are and what you 
are going to do. Offer reassurance. Try to gain the 
person’s trust. If a parent, guardian or caregiver is 
present, ask that person to help you give care to the 
person. 
People with certain types of mental illness might 
misinterpret your actions as being hostile. If the 
scene becomes unsafe, you may need to remove 
yourself from the immediate area. Call 9-1-1 or the 
local emergency number and explain your concerns 
about a potential psychiatric emergency. If possible, 
keep track of the person’s location and what he or 
she is doing. Report this information to the emergency 
responders.
LANGUAGE BARRIERS
Getting consent to give care to a person with whom you 
have a language barrier can be a problem. Find out if any 
bystanders speak the person’s language and can help to 
translate. Do your best to communicate nonverbally. Use 
gestures and facial expressions. If the person is in pain, 
he or she probably will be anxious to show you where 
the pain is located. Watch his or her gestures and facial 
expressions carefully. When you speak to the person, 
speak slowly and in a normal tone. The person probably 
will have no trouble hearing you.
When you call 9-1-1 or the local emergency number, 
explain that you are having difﬁ culty communicating 
with the person and tell the call taker which language 
you believe the person speaks. The EMS system 
may have someone available who can help with 
communication. If the person has a life-threatening 
condition, such as severe bleeding, consent is 
implied. 
CRIME SCENES AND 
HOSTILE SITUATIONS
In certain situations, such as a giving care to a person 
in a crime scene or an injured person who is hostile, you 
will need to use extreme caution. Although your ﬁ rst 
reaction may be to go to the aid of a person, in these 
situations you should call 9-1-1 or the local emergency 
number and stay at a safe distance. 
 

--- Page 159 ---
  CHAPTER  9    |    Special Situations and Circumstances 147
Do not enter the scene of a suicide. If you happen to be 
on the scene when an unarmed person threatens suicide, 
call 9-1-1 or the local emergency number. Do not argue 
with the person. Remain at a safe distance. 
Leave or avoid entering any area considered to be a 
crime scene, such as one where there is a weapon, or the 
scene of a physical or sexual assault. Call 9-1-1 or the 
local emergency number and stay at a safe distance. 
You may encounter a situation where there is a hostile or 
angry person. A person’s rage or hostility may be caused 
by the injury, pain or fear. Some individuals, afraid of 
losing control, may act resentful and suspicious. Hostile 
behavior also may result from the use of alcohol or 
other drugs, a lack of oxygen or a medical condition. 
If a person refuses your care or threatens you, remove 
yourself from the situation and stay at a safe distance. 
Never argue with or restrain an injured or ill person. Call 
9-1-1 or the local emergency number if someone has not 
already done so. Never put your own safety at risk.
Uninjured family members also may display anger. 
This anger may stem from panic, anxiety or guilt. Try to 
remain calm and explain what you plan to do in giving 
emergency care. If pos sible, ﬁ nd a way that family 
members can help, such as by comforting the person.
PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER
It is important to be aware of the special needs 
and considerations of children and infants, older 
adults, people with disabilities and people who 
speak a different language than your own. In rare 
circumstances, you could ﬁ  nd yourself in a position to 
give help in an emergency childbirth or help an older 
person who has become suddenly ill. Knowing what to 
do in these types of situations will help you to act calmly 
and give the right care. Interacting and communicating 
with all types of people in many different situations 
will enable you to respond quickly and effectively in 
an emergency.
 

--- Page 160 ---
148  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
Asthma
Note: The instructions for administering asthma medication found in this chapter should not be substituted for those 
given by a medical professional to an individual person. Nor should these instructions be substituted for directions 
given by a medical professional in consultation with a site where asthma medication will be administered. Consult a 
health care professional for speciﬁ  c advice on the use of asthma inhalers and nebulizers. 
A
sthma is a life-long lung disease. It affects millions of adults and children in the United States. Cases of severe 
asthma and deaths from asthma are increasing. As a ﬁ  rst aid responder, there is a good chance that you could be 
asked to help a person with a breathing emergency caused by asthma. 
In this chapter, you will read about how to identify the signals of an asthma attack. This chapter also covers how to 
give care to a person having an asthma attack, which includes helping the person to use an inhaler to administer 
quick-relief medications. 
CHAPTER   10
 

--- Page 161 ---
  CHAPTER  10    |    Asthma 149
ASTHMA
Asthma is an illness in which certain substances or 
conditions, called “triggers,” cause inﬂ ammation 
and constriction of the airways (small tubes in the 
lungs through which we breathe), making breathing 
difﬁ cult. Triggers of an asthma attack include exercise, 
cold air, allergens or irritants, such as perfume. 
In 2008, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
(CDC) estimated that over 23 million Americans were 
affected by asthma. Asthma is more common in children 
and young adults. However, its frequency and severity is 
increasing in all age groups in the United States. Asthma 
is the third-ranking cause of hospitalization among 
those younger than 15 years. 
People diagnosed with asthma can reduce the risk of 
an attack by controlling environmental variables when 
possible. This helps to limit exposure to the triggers that 
can start an asthma attack. 
When an attack does occur, they can use medications 
and other forms of treatment. Asthma medications stop 
the muscle spasm and open the airway, which makes 
breathing easier. 
Asthma Triggers
A trigger is anything that sets off or starts an asthma 
attack. A trigger for one person is not necessarily a 
trigger for another. Asthma triggers include 
the following:
 ■ Dust and smoke 
 ■ Air pollution
 ■ Respiratory infections
 ■ Fear or anxiety
 ■ Perfume 
 ■ Exercise
 ■ Plants and molds
 ■ Medications, such as aspirin
 ■ Animal dander
 ■ Temperature extremes
 ■ Changes in weather
These are only a few of the things that can trigger 
asthma in people. 
Preventing Asthma Attacks
Prevention is key. A person can follow these 
preventative measures to reduce his or her risk of an 
attack:
 ■ Limit triggers in the home.
 ■ Control emotions.
 ■ Prevent infections.
 ■ Reduce environmental triggers.
 ■ Exercise carefully.
Limiting Triggers in the Home
You can reduce the chances of triggering an asthma 
attack at home by:
 ■ Keeping plants outside.
 ■ Washing bedclothes and pajamas weekly in hot water.
 ■ Using hypoallergenic covers on mattresses and 
pillows.
 ■ Eliminating or reducing the number of carpets and 
rugs.
 ■ Regularly steam cleaning all carpets, rugs and 
upholstery.
 ■ Keeping the home clean and free of dust and 
pests—wet dusting can be more effective than 
dry dusting.
 ■ Not allowing, or being around, smoke.
 ■ Regularly changing the air ﬁ lter in the central air 
conditioning or heating unit.
 ■ Eliminating or minimizing the number of stuffed toys.
 ■ Using hypoallergenic health and beauty products.
 ■ Washing pets weekly.
 ■ Keeping pets outside of the house.
Controlling Emotions
Certain strong emotions can trigger an asthma attack. 
When you feel a strong emotion, such as anger or fear, 
the following suggestions can reduce the chances that 
the emotions will trigger an asthma attack:
 ■ Take a long deep breath in through the nose and 
slowly let it out through the mouth.
 ■ Count to 10.
 ■ Talk with a family member, trusted friend or health 
care provider.
 ■ Do a relaxing activity.
Preventing Infections 
Colds and other respiratory infections can make an 
asthma condition worse. One of the most common ways 
to catch colds is by rubbing the nose or eyes with hands 
contaminated with a cold virus. Contamination often 
occurs by touching surfaces (such as doorknobs) or 
objects that other people have touched. 
Some ways to reduce the chances of getting a cold or 
other respiratory infection include:
 ■ Washing hands regularly, especially after using the 
restroom or shaking hands with other people and 
before eating. 
 

--- Page 162 ---
150  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
 ■ Cleaning environmental surfaces, such as telephones 
and counters, with a virus-killing disinfectant. The 
viruses that cause colds can survive up to 3 hours on 
objects such as telephones, counters and stair railings. 
Disinfecting them regularly can help to prevent the 
spread of colds and viruses.
 ■ Getting vaccinated for illnesses when a vaccine is 
available, such as for inﬂ uenza and whooping 
cough (pertussis).
Your health care provider might have other suggestions 
based on your medical history.
Reducing Environmental Triggers
Sudden changes in the weather, heavy mold or pollen 
content in the air and pollution can trigger an asthma 
attack. To avoid attacks brought on by triggers in 
the environment:
 ■ Wear the right clothing for the weather conditions.
 ■ Stay indoors on days when there is a high risk of 
respiratory trouble. 
 ■ Take preventative medications, as prescribed by your 
health care provider.
 ■ Stay away from places with high amounts of dirt, 
smoke and other irritants.
 ■ Know how the weather affects your condition. 
 ■ Talk to your health care provider about other 
prevention strategies.
Exercising Carefully 
Exercise-induced asthma happens during or shortly 
after exercise. Having this type of asthma does not 
mean one cannot or should not exercise or play sports. 
It is, however, important to know what to do to 
prevent an asthma attack. Things to keep in mind 
when you have exercise-induced asthma include 
the following:
 ■ Take prescribed medications 30 to 60 minutes 
before exercising. 
 ■ Slowly warm up before exercising. Cool down gently 
after exercising.
 ■ Make sure that you drink plenty of ﬂ uids during 
exercise.
 ■ Seek and follow the advice of your health care 
provider.
 ■ If participating in organized sports, notify the coach 
of your condition.
Using Medications to Control Asthma 
People who have been diagnosed with asthma will 
have a personalized medication plan. They should take 
all medications exactly as prescribed by their health 
care provider. 
Asthma medications are available in two forms: 
long-term control and quick relief.
Long-Term Control Medications
Long-term control medications prevent or 
reverse inﬂ ammation (swelling) in the airway. 
They also help to decrease sensitivity, which helps 
to keep the airways from reacting to asthma triggers. 
The long-term control medicines work slowly. They 
help to control asthma over many hours. They should 
be taken every day whether or not signals of asthma 
are present. 
Quick-Relief Medications
Quick-relief or rescue medications are used to stop 
an asthma attack. These medications work quickly to 
relieve the sudden swelling. They lessen wheezing, 
coughing and chest tightness. This allows the person 
to breathe easier. They also are called short-acting 
bronchodilators.
Methods of Delivery
The most common way to take long-term control and 
quick-relief asthma medications is by inhaling them. 
Inhalation allows the medication to reach the airways 
faster and work quickly. There also are fewer side 
effects.
Medications are inhaled using a metered dose 
inhaler (MDI), a dry powder inhaler (DPI) or a 
small-volume nebulizer (Fig. 10-1). Both long-term 
and quick-relief medications also are available in pill 
and liquid form. In addition, long-term medications 
are available in the form of an injection given just under 
the skin.
FIGURE 10-1 Long-term and quick-release medications are inhaled 
using an MDI, a DPI or a small-volume nebulizer.
 

--- Page 163 ---
  CHAPTER  10    |    Asthma 151
MDI
An MDI sends a measured dose of medicine in mist 
form directly into the person’s mouth. The person 
gently presses down the top of the inhaler. This 
causes a small amount of pressurized gas to push the 
medicine out quickly. Sometimes a “spacer” is used 
to control the amount of medication that is inhaled. 
The medicine goes into the spacer and then the person 
inhales the medication through the mouthpiece on 
the spacer. 
DPI
A DPI is similar to an MDI. It is a hand-held device 
that delivers a dry powder form of the medication. 
Some dry powders are tasteless. Others are mixed 
with lactose to give them a sweet taste. The DPI is 
administered by breathing in quickly to activate the 
inhaler. The person does not have to press down the 
top of the inhaler. DPIs may be difﬁ cult for some 
people to use because of the need to take in a quick, 
strong breath.
Small-Volume Nebulizers
Small-volume nebulizers deliver medication in the form 
of a mist. The mist is delivered over several minutes. 
This is especially helpful when the person is unable to 
take deep breaths. Nebulizers are commonly used for 
children younger than 5 years and the elderly. They also 
are used for people who have trouble using inhalers and 
for those with severe asthma. 
What to Look For
You often can tell when a person is having an asthma 
attack by the hoarse whistling sound made while 
exhaling. This sound, known as wheezing, occurs 
because air becomes trapped in the lungs. Coughing 
after exercise, crying or laughing are other signals that 
an asthma attack could begin. 
Signals of an asthma attack include:
 ■ Trouble breathing or shortness of breath.
 ■ Rapid, shallow breathing.
 ■ Sweating.
 ■ Tightness in the chest.
 ■ Inability to talk without stopping for a breath.
 ■ Feelings of fear or confusion.
When to Call 9-1-1
Call 9-1-1 or the local emergency number if the person’s 
breathing trouble does not improve in a few minutes 
after using the quick-relief medication.
What to Do Until Help Arrives
Remain calm. This will help the person to remain 
calm and ease breathing troubles. Help the person to 
sit comfortably (Fig. 10-2). Loosen any tight clothing 
around the neck and abdomen. Assist the person 
with his or her prescribed quick-relief medication if 
requested and if permitted by state or local regulations.
PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER
Asthma is a life-long lung disease that affects 
millions of adults and children in the United States. 
Asthma can be controlled. Knowing the triggers for 
asthma and how to limit those triggers, and taking 
prescribed medications as directed can help to prevent 
an asthma attack. 
It is important to be prepared to help people with 
breathing emergencies caused by asthma. The ﬁ rst step 
is to know the signals of an asthma attack. When you 
recognize the signals, act quickly and give appropriate 
care. Your care could help to save the life of a person 
with asthma.
FIGURE 10-2 To assist a person having an asthma attack, remain 
calm and help the person to sit comfortably.
 

--- Page 164 ---
152  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
IF THE PERSON HAS MEDICATION FOR ASTHMA, HELP HIM OR HER TAKE IT IF ASKED:
  HELP PERSON SIT UP 
Help the person sit up and rest in a position comfortable for breathing.
  CHECK PRESCRIPTION 
 ■Ensure that the prescription is in the person’s name 
and is prescribed for “quick relief” or “acute” attacks. 
 ■Ensure that the expiration date has not passed.
  SHAKE INHALER 
  REMOVE MOUTHPIECE COVER 
  If an extension tube (spacer) is available, attach 
and use it.  INSTRUCT PERSON TO BREATHE OUT
 Tell the person to breathe out as much as possible through the mouth.
ASSISTING WITH AN ASTHMA INHALER
SKILL SHEET
TIP: The person may use different techniques, such as 
holding the inhaler two-ﬁ  nger lengths away from the mouth.
TIP: Always obtain consent and wash your hands immediately after giving care. Read and 
follow all instructions printed on the inhaler prior to administering the medication to the person. 
 

--- Page 165 ---
  CHAPTER  10    |    Asthma 153
SKILL SHEET
  ADMINISTER MEDICATION 
Have the person place his or her lips tightly around 
the mouthpiece and take a long, slow breath. 
 ■As the person breathes in slowly, administer the 
medication by quickly pressing down on the inhaler 
canister, or the person may self-administer the 
medication.
 ■The person should continue a full, deep breath.
 ■Tell the person to try to hold his or her breath for 
a count of 
10. 
 ■When using an extension tube (spacer) have the 
person take 
5 to 6 deep breaths through the tube 
without holding his or her breath.
  RECORD TIME OF ADMINISTRATION 
 ■Note the time of administration and any change in the person’s condition.
 ■The medication may be repeated once after 1 to 2 minutes. 
  HAVE PERSON RINSE MOUTH 
Have the person rinse his or her mouth out with water 
to reduce side effects. 
 ■Stay with the person and monitor his or her condition 
and give CARE for any other conditions. 
  CARE FOR SHOCK
Care for shock. 
 ■Keep the person from getting chilled or overheated. 
 ■CALL 9-1-1 or the local emergency number if trouble 
breathing does not improve quickly.
TIP: These medications might take 5 to 15 minutes to 
reach full effectiveness. Follow label instructions regarding 
additional doses of the medication.
 

--- Page 166 ---
154  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
Anaphylaxis and Epinephrine 
Auto-Injectors
Note: The instructions in this chapter are not a substitute for the directions given by a medical professional to an 
individual person. Nor should these instructions be substituted for directions given by a medical professional in 
consultation with a site where epinephrine auto-injectors will be used. Consult a health care professional for speciﬁ c 
advice on the use of epinephrine auto-injectors. 
A
severe allergic reaction can bring on a condition called anaphylaxis, also known as anaphylactic 
shock. Anaphylaxis can quickly cause trouble breathing. It is a life-threatening emergency that must be 
recognized and cared for immediately. 
In this chapter you will learn to identify the signals of anaphylaxis. You also will learn what care to give to a person 
in anaphylactic shock. Part of giving care may mean helping the person use an epinephrine auto-injector. 
CHAPTER   11
 

--- Page 167 ---
  CHAPTER  11    |    Anaphylaxis and Epinephrine Auto-Injectors 155
ANAPHYLAXIS
Every year in the United States, between 400 and 
800 deaths are caused by anaphylaxis. Respond quickly 
if a person is exposed to an antigen—a foreign substance 
that brings on an allergic reaction. Fortunately, some 
deaths can be prevented if anaphylaxis is recognized 
immediately and cared for quickly. 
Allergic Reactions
Allergic reactions are caused by the activity of the 
immune system. The body recognizes and protects itself 
from antigens by producing antibodies. These antibodies 
ﬁ ght antigens. Antibodies are found in the liver, bone 
marrow, spleen and lymph glands. When the immune 
system recognizes an antigen, it releases chemicals to 
ﬁ ght these foreign substances and eliminate them from 
the body.
Antigens that cause an allergic reaction—are called 
allergens. Allergic reactions range from mild to very 
severe. A common mild reaction is skin irritation from 
contact with poison ivy. A severe, life-threatening 
reaction is swelling of the airway, trouble breathing and 
an obstructed airway.
Some common allergens include bee or insect 
venom, certain antibiotics, pollen, animal dander and 
sulfa drugs. 
Over 12 million people in the United States have food 
allergies. Every year there are over 30,000 cases of food-
related anaphylaxis. Certain types of food commonly 
cause an allergic reaction in individuals with sensitivities 
to those foods. Peanuts and tree nuts cause the most 
cases of fatal and near-fatal allergic reactions to food. 
Other common food allergens include cow’s milk, eggs, 
seafood (especially shellﬁ sh), soy and wheat. 
What to Look For 
Anaphylaxis usually occurs suddenly, within seconds 
or minutes after contact with the substance. The skin 
or area of the body that comes in contact with the 
substance usually swells and turns red (Fig. 11-1). Other 
signals include the following:
 ■ Difﬁ  culty breathing, wheezing or shortness of breath
 ■ Tight feeling in the chest and throat
 ■ Swelling of the face, throat or tongue
 ■ Weakness, dizziness or confusion
 ■ Rash or hives
 ■ Low blood pressure
 ■ Shock
Trouble breathing can progress to a blocked airway due 
to swelling of the lips, tongue, throat and larynx (voice 
box). Low blood pressure and shock may accompany 
these reactions. Death from anaphylaxis may happen 
because the person’s breathing is severely restricted.
When to Call 9-1-1 
Call 9-1-1 or the local emergency number if the person:
 ■ Has trouble breathing. 
 ■ Complains of the throat tightening.
 ■ Explains that he or she is subject to severe allergic 
reactions. 
 ■ Is or becomes unconscious. 
What to Do Until Help Arrives 
If you suspect anaphylaxis, and have called 9-1-1 or the 
local emergency number, follow these guidelines for 
giving care:
 ■ Monitor the person’s breathing and for changes in his 
or her condition.
 ■ Give care for life-threatening emergencies.
 ■ Check a conscious person to determine:
 { The substance (antigen) involved.
 { The route of exposure to the antigen.
 { The effects of the exposure.
If the person is conscious and is able to talk, ask: 
 { What is your name?
 { What happened?
 { How do you feel?
 { Do you feel any tingling in your hands, feet or lips?
 { Do you feel pain anywhere?
 { Do you have any allergies? Do you have prescribed 
medications to take in case of an allergic reaction?
 { Do you know what triggered the reaction?
FIGURE 11-1 In anaphylaxis, air passages can swell, restricting 
breathing.
 

--- Page 168 ---
156  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
 { How much and how long were you exposed?
 { Do you have any medical conditions or are you 
taking any medications?
Quickly check the person from head to toe. Visually 
inspect the body:
 { Observe for signals of anaphylaxis including 
respiratory distress.
 { Look for a medical identiﬁ cation (ID) tag, bracelet 
or necklace.
Check the person’s head. 
 { Look for swelling of the face, neck or tongue.
 { Notice if the person is drowsy, not alert, confused 
or exhibiting slurred speech.
Check skin appearance. Look at person’s face and 
lips. Ask yourself, is the skin: 
 { Cold or hot?
 { Unusually wet or dry? 
 { Pale, ashen, bluish or ﬂ ushed? 
Check the person’s breathing. 
 { Ask if he or she is experiencing pain during 
breathing. 
 { Notice rate, depth of breaths, wheezes or 
gasping sounds.
Care for respiratory distress.
 { Help the person to rest in the most comfortable 
position for breathing, usually sitting.
 { Calm and reassure the person.
 ■ Assist the person with using a prescribed epinephrine 
auto-injector, if available and if permitted by state 
regulations.
 ■ Document any changes in the person’s condition 
over time.
Assisting with an Epinephrine Auto-Injector
People who know they are extremely allergic to 
certain substances usually try to avoid them. 
However, sometimes this is impossible. These people 
may carry an anaphylaxis kit in case of a severe 
allergic reaction.
These kits are available by prescription only. 
They contain a dose (or two) of the drug epinephrine. 
This drug works in the body to counteract the 
anaphylactic reaction. Two injectable epinephrine 
systems are available: the Epi-Pen
®, which includes 
one dose; and Twinject ®, which includes two doses 
(Fig. 11-2, A–B). The instructions provided by the 
manufacturer and health care provider always 
FIGURE 11-2, A–B A , An Epi-Pen® is preloaded with a single dose of the drug epinephrine. 
B , A Twinject® is preloaded with a double dose of epinephrine.
A
B
 

--- Page 169 ---
  CHAPTER  11    |    Anaphylaxis and Epinephrine Auto-Injectors 157
should be followed when assisting someone with 
their prescribed epinephrine auto-injector. A second 
dose should not be given unless recommended by 
advanced medical personnel or in extremely 
unusual circumstances, where advanced medical 
care is not available or is signiﬁ cantly delayed 
and signals of anaphylaxis persist after a 
few minutes. 
Note: Only the person having the reaction should 
self-administer the second dose included with the  
Twinject
® injector.
An auto-injector contains a preloaded dose of 
0.3 mg of epinephrine for adults or 0.15 mg of 
epinephrine for children weighing 33 to 66 pounds. 
The injector has a spring-loaded plunger. When 
activated, it injects the epinephrine. The auto-injector 
is activated when it is forcefully pushed against the skin. 
It should be used on a muscular area, usually 
the person’s mid-outer thigh (Fig. 11-3). The 
injector needs to stay in place for 10 seconds. 
This allows the medication to fully empty. 
When the auto-injector is removed, handle 
it carefully and do not touch the needle if it 
is exposed. 
If a person is conscious and able to use the 
auto-injector, help him or her in any way asked. 
If you know that a person has a prescribed 
auto-injector and is unable to administer 
it him- or herself, then you may help the 
person use it where allowed by state or local 
laws or regulations. Remember, for a person 
experiencing anaphylaxis, time is of the essence. 
Helping the Person Self-Administer 
an Antihistamine
Some anaphylaxis kits also contain an 
antihistamine in pill form. An antihistamine is a type of 
medication. It lessens the effects of compounds released 
by the body during an allergic reaction. 
The person should read and follow all medication 
labels. It also is important for the person to follow any 
instructions given by the health care provider. Check 
state and local regulations about assisting someone 
with the use of prescription and over-the-counter 
medications. 
PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER
Anaphylaxis is a life-threatening emergency. Knowing 
how to give immediate care and help someone use an 
epinephrine auto-injector could mean the difference 
between life and death. 
FIGURE 11-3 Forcefully pushing the auto-injector against the skin activates the 
device. It should be used on a muscular area, usually the person’s mid-outer thigh.
 

--- Page 170 ---
158  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
ASSISTING WITH AN EPINEPHRINE 
AUTO-INJECTOR
Determine whether the person has already taken epinephrine or antihistamine. If so, administer a second 
dose only when EMS personnel are not present or delayed and if signals of anaphylaxis persist after a 
few minutes. Check the label to conﬁ  rm that the prescription of the auto-injector is for this person.
Check the expiration date of the auto-injector. If it has expired, DO NOT USE IT. If the medication is 
visible, conﬁ  rm that the liquid is clear and not cloudy. If it is cloudy, DO NOT USE IT. 
SKILL SHEET
NOTE:  If possible, help the person self-administer the auto-injector.
TO CARE FOR A CONSCIOUS PERSON WHO IS UNABLE TO SEL F-ADMINISTER 
THE AUTO-INJECTOR, AND LOCAL OR STATE REGULATIONS ALLOW:
  LOCATE INJECTION SITE 
Locate the outside middle of one thigh to use as 
the injection site. 
NOTE:  If injecting through clothing, press on the area 
with a hand to determine that there are no obstructions 
at the injection site, such as keys, coins, the side seam 
of trousers, etc.
  REMOVE SAFETY CAP 
Grasp the auto-injector ﬁ  rmly in your ﬁ st, 
and pull off the safety cap with your other hand.
  POSITION AUTO-INJECTOR  
Hold the tip (needle end) near the patient’s outer thigh so 
that the auto-injector is at a 90-degree angle to the thigh.
 

--- Page 171 ---
  CHAPTER  11    |    Anaphylaxis and Epinephrine Auto-Injectors 159
  ADMINISTER INJECTION 
Quickly and ﬁ  rmly push the tip straight into 
the outer thigh. You will hear a click.
  HOLD IN PLACE 
Hold the auto-injector ﬁ  rmly in place for 10 seconds, 
then remove it from the thigh and massage the injection 
site with a gloved hand for several seconds.   RECHECK BREATHING  
Recheck the person’s breathing and observe 
his or her response to the medication. 
  HANDLE USED AUTO-INJECTOR  
 CAREFULL Y
Handle the used auto-injector carefully, placing it in a 
safe container. Give it to EMS personnel when they arrive.
SKILL SHEET
 

--- Page 172 ---
160  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
Injury Prevention and Emergency 
Preparedness
APPENDIX 
U
nintentional injuries cause disability and death for thousands of people in the United States each year. These 
injuries incur billions of dollars in lost wages, medical expenses, insurance, property damage and other 
indirect costs.
Injuries are not always inevitable. Being prepared and following established safety precautions can reduce risk, prevent 
injuries and save lives.
 

--- Page 173 ---
  APPENDIX     |    Injury Prevention and Emergency Preparedness 161
INJURIES
Every year in the United States millions of people 
suffer an unintentional injury. In 2007, nearly 
124,000 Americans died from these injuries. 
That year, unintentional injury was the leading 
cause of death for people 1 to 44 years of age; 
of these, motor-vehicle crashes were the number 
one cause of death from unintentional injury, 
followed by poisoning and falls (Fig. A-1). In 2007, 
American also sustained approximately 34.3 million 
nonfatal injuries that required medical attention.
Injury Risk Factors
Several factors affect a person’s risk of being injured. 
These factors include age, gender, geographic location, 
economic status and alcohol misuse and abuse.
 ■ Nonfatal injury rates remain highest among people 
younger than 39 years; however, deaths from injury 
are more common in people 40 years of age and older. 
Also of note is this age group has the highest rate of 
injuries that result in death.
 ■ Gender also is a signiﬁ cant factor in risk of injury. 
Males are at greater risk than females for any type 
of injury. In general, men are about twice as likely to 
suffer a fatal injury as women.
 ■ Environmental and economic factors inﬂ uence injury 
rates. Living on a farm or in the city, having a home 
made of wood or brick, using a speciﬁ c type of heat 
in your home and your local climate all affect your 
degree of risk. For instance, death rates from injury 
are higher in rural areas as opposed to metropolitan 
areas. The death rate from injuries is twice as high in 
low-income areas as in high-income areas.
 ■ Alcohol misuse and abuse is a signiﬁ  cant factor in 
many injuries and fatalities, in both teenagers and 
adults. In 2008, 32 percent of all motor-vehicle deaths 
were alcohol related. It is estimated that a signiﬁ cant 
number of victims who die as a result of falls, drowning 
and ﬁ  res were under the inﬂ  uence of alcohol.
Reducing Your Risk of Injury
Statistics show that people of certain ages and gender are 
injured more often than others. However, the chances of 
injury have more to do with a person’s behavior. Many 
injuries are preventable and result from the way people 
interact with potential dangers in the environment.
Risks of an injury can be reduced by taking the 
following steps:
 ■ Know the risk.
 ■ Take measures that make a difference. Change 
  behaviors that increase your risk of 
  injury and your risk injuring others.
 ■ Think safety. Be alert for and avoid 
potentially harmful conditions or 
activities that increase your risk 
of injury. Take precautions, such 
as wearing appropriate protective 
devices, including helmets, padding 
and eyewear. Always buckle up 
when driving or riding in motor 
vehicles.
 ■ Learn and use ﬁ  rst aid skills. There 
have been dramatic improvements 
in emergency medical systems 
nationwide over the past decade; 
however, you are the person who 
often makes the difference between 
life and death. Apply your ﬁ rst aid 
training when necessary. 
In addition to these personal steps, laws 
and consumer protection regulations 
have been put in place to reduce or 
prevent injury. Examples include 
laws on the mandatory use of safety 
belts, manufacturers’ requirements to 
build air bags into motor vehicles and 
restrictions on the use of cell phones 
while driving.
FIGURE A-1 The leading causes of unintentional death in the United States in 2007.
 

--- Page 174 ---
162  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
FOCUS ON PREPAREDNESS
Emergencies can happen quickly. There may 
not be time to consider what to do, only time to 
react. You can improve your response and the 
outcome of emergencies by developing a plan. 
Meet with your family or household members 
to gather information for an emergency 
action plan.
Think about your home:
 ■ Style of home (e.g., mobile, high-rise 
apartment, single family) and type of 
construction (e.g., wood, brick)
 ■ Location of sleeping areas (e.g., basement, 
ground ﬂ  oor, second ﬂ oor)
 ■ Location of windows
 ■ Number and location of smoke alarms
 ■ Location of gasoline, solvent or paint storage
 ■ Number and types of locks on doors
 ■ Location of telephones, ﬂ ashlights, ﬁ re 
extinguisher and ﬁ  rst aid kit
Think about who lives in your home:
 ■ Total number of people and number of people 
older than 65 years or younger than 6 years 
of age
 ■ Number of people sleeping above or below the 
ground ﬂ oor
 ■ Number of people who are unable to exit 
without help
Think about the types of possible emergencies that 
you may face:
 ■ Injuries (e.g., fall or cut)
 ■ Illnesses (e.g., stroke or heart attack)
 ■ Natural disasters (e.g., tornado or earthquake)
 ■ Fire
Write down the list of emergencies that you could 
face. Under each one write:
1. How the emergency would affect your home.
2.  How you would like the people in your 
home to react. Speciﬁ cally, what would be 
the responsibilities for each member of the 
household in an emergency?
3.  The steps you have already taken to prevent 
or minimize the effect of the emergency.
4. The steps you still need to take.
Try to imagine as many situations as possible for 
each emergency. Gather information from sources 
such as insurance companies, your city or county 
emergency management ofﬁ  ce and your police, ﬁ re 
or rescue department.
When thinking about emergencies away from home:
 ■ Use the same process to decide what to do.
When you reach a decision, write it down. You now 
have a personal emergency plan. Practice it. Keep 
it current.
DEVELOPING A PLAN OF ACTION
It also is important to develop a plan of action in case of 
an emergency. Being prepared for an emergency before 
it actually occurs will help you, and those with whom you 
live, to react calmly in a stressful situation. See Focus on 
Preparedness: Developing a Plan of Action above.
Vehicle Safety
Tens of thousands of people in the United States die in 
motor-vehicle crashes each year. Crash injuries result in 
nearly 5 million emergency department visits annually. 
The economic burden of these motor-vehicle-related 
deaths and injuries is signiﬁ cant.
Do not drink and drive. If you are going to consume 
alcohol, plan ahead to ﬁ nd a ride, or take a cab or public 
transportation. If you are with a group, designate a 
driver who agrees not to drink on this occasion.
Do not become distracted. Doing things that take your 
eyes off the road, your hands off the wheel or your mind 
off of driving are distractions that can be dangerous or 
even fatal. The use of electronic devices while driving, 
such as talking on hand-held cell phones and text 
messaging, causes thousands of collisions and highway 
fatalities. Other distractions while driving include eating 
and drinking; talking to passengers; reading; using 
navigation systems; and operating radios and CD or 
MP3 players. Many states and the District of Columbia 
have enacted laws restricting the use of hand-held cell 
phones and electronic devices.
 

--- Page 175 ---
  APPENDIX     |    Injury Prevention and Emergency Preparedness 163
When riding in a motor vehicle, always buckle up. 
Although cars more often are equipped with airbags than 
not, wearing a safety belt is the easiest and best way to 
prevent injury in a motor-vehicle collision. Always wear a 
safety belt, including a shoulder restraint, when riding in 
either the front or back seat. In 49 states and the District 
of Columbia, wearing a safety belt is required by law. 
In 2007, safety belts saved more than 13,000 lives.
Although airbags have saved many lives, they pose 
several risks to children. The amount of force during 
airbag deployment can kill or severely injure children 
occupying the front seat. Even when in a car seat, infants 
could be at risk. An infant in a rear-facing car seat is 
close to the dashboard and therefore could easily be 
struck by the airbag with sufﬁ cient force to cause serious 
harm or even death. Always have children younger than 
13 years sit in the back seat, away from airbags.
Child Safety Seats
Motor-vehicle crashes are the leading cause of 
injury-related deaths for children.  All 50 states and the 
District of Columbia require the use of child safety seats 
and child safety belts. Always have infants and children 
ride in the back seat in safety seats that are approved for 
the child’s weight and/or age (Fig. A-2).
Choosing the proper child safety seat to ﬁ t the weight 
and age of your child is only the ﬁ rst step. Another 
important child-safety-seat issue is making sure that 
the child safety seat is installed correctly in your vehicle. 
The National Highway Trafﬁ c Safety Administration 
(NHTSA) estimates that three out of four parents do 
not properly use child restraints. It is essential to always 
read the instruction manual. Every manufacturer of 
child safety seats provides speciﬁ c instructions about 
how to use and install its seat. To make sure that you 
installed your child safety seat correctly in your vehicle, 
you can have it checked by professionals. Contact 
NHTSA for information on ﬁ nding a nearby child safety 
seat inspection station.
Fire Safety
Fire safety in the home and in hotels is essential. You 
should learn how to prevent ﬁ res but also know what to 
do in case a ﬁ re does occur. 
Home Fire Safety Prevention 
and Preparation
In 2006, 3202 people died in unintentional ﬁ res in the 
United States. Approximately four of 10 deaths from 
ﬁ res occurring in the home occurred in homes without 
smoke alarms. To prevent ﬁ res:
 ■ Install a smoke alarm on every ﬂ oor of your home. 
Check the batteries once a month, and change the 
batteries at least twice a year.
 ■ Keep ﬁ re extinguishers where they are most likely to 
be needed and keep matches out of children’s reach.
 ■ Always keep space heaters away from curtains and 
other ﬂ ammable materials.
 ■ Install guards around ﬁ replaces, radiators, pipes and 
wood-burning stoves.
Regardless of the cause of ﬁ  res, everyone needs 
to know how to respond in case of ﬁ  re. Plan and practice 
a ﬁ  re escape route with your family or roommates 
(Fig. A-3):
 ■ Gather everyone together at a convenient time.
 ■ Sketch a ﬂ oor plan of all rooms, including 
doors, windows and hallways, for all ﬂ oors of 
the home.
 ■ Draw the escape plan with arrows showing two 
ways, if possible, to get out of each room. 
Sleeping areas are the most important, since many 
ﬁ  res happen at night.
 ■ Plan to use stairs only, never an elevator.
 ■ Plan where everyone will meet after leaving 
the building.
 ■ Designate who should call the ﬁ re department and 
from which phone.
FIGURE A-2 Infants and children always should ride in an 
approved safety seat.
 

--- Page 176 ---
164  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
 ■ Plan to leave the burning building ﬁ rst and then call 
from a phone nearby, if possible.
Remember and use the following guidelines to escape 
from ﬁ re:
 ■ If smoke is present, crawl low to escape. Because 
smoke rises in a ﬁ  re, breathable air is often close to 
the ﬂ oor.
 ■ Make sure that children can open windows, go 
down a ladder and lower themselves to the ground. 
Practice with them. Always lower children to the 
ground ﬁ  rst before you go out of a window.
 ■ Get out quickly and do not, under any circumstances, 
return to a burning building.
 ■ If you cannot escape, stay in the room and stuff door 
cracks and vents with wet towels, rags or clothing. If 
a phone is available, call the ﬁ re department—even 
if rescuers are already outside—and inform the call 
taker of your location.
Contact your local ﬁ  re department for additional ﬁ re 
safety guidelines.
Hotel Fire Safety
In addition to ﬁ  re safety at home, knowing how to exit 
from a hotel in a ﬁ  re could save your life. Locate the ﬁ re 
exits on your ﬂ  oor. If you hear an alarm while in your 
room, feel the door ﬁ  rst and do not open it if it is hot. Do 
not use the elevator. If the hall is relatively smoke-free, 
walk to the stairs to exit; if the hall is ﬁ  lled with smoke, 
crawl to the exit. If you cannot get to the exit, return to 
your room. Turn off the ventilation system, stuff door 
cracks and vents with wet towels and call the front desk or 
the ﬁ  re department to report the ﬁ  re and your location.
Safety at Home
In 2007, 44 percent of all nonfatal injuries requiring 
medical attention in the United States occurred in or 
around the home.
FIGURE A-3 Plan and practice a ﬁ  re escape route with your family or roommates.
 

--- Page 177 ---
  APPENDIX     |    Injury Prevention and Emergency Preparedness 165
Removing hazards and practicing good safety habits will 
make your home safer. You can get a good start on this 
by making a list of the needed improvements. Safety at 
home is relatively simple and relies largely on common 
sense. Take the following steps to make your home a 
safer place:
 ■ Post emergency numbers near every phone. Include 
9-1-1 or the local emergency number, National Poison 
Control Center Hotline (1-800-222-1222), primary 
health care provider, as well as any other important 
numbers.
 ■ Make sure that stairways and hallways are 
well lit.
 ■ Equip stairways with handrails, and use nonslip 
treads or securely fastened rugs.
 ■ Secure rugs to the ﬂ  oor with double-sided tape.
 ■ If moisture accumulates in damp spots, 
correct the cause of the problem. Clean up spills 
promptly.
 ■ Keep medicines and poisonous substances 
separate from each other and from food. They 
should be out of reach of children and in secured 
cabinets.
 ■ Keep medicines in their original containers with 
safety caps.
 ■ Keep your heating and cooling systems and all 
appliances in good working order. Check heating and 
cooling systems annually before use.
 ■ Read and follow manufacturers’ instructions for 
electrical tools, appliances and toys.
 ■ Turn off the oven and other appliances when not in 
use. Unplug certain appliances, such as irons, curling 
irons, coffeemakers and portable heaters, after each 
use. These items can easily overheat or spark a ﬁ re 
when unattended.
 ■ Make sure that your home has at least one working, 
easily accessible ﬁ re extinguisher. Make sure that 
everyone knows how to use it.
 ■ Keep ﬁ rearms in the home unloaded in a locked 
place, out of the reach of children. Store ammunition 
separately in a locked location.
 ■ Practice safe ﬁ rearms handling and safety 
education.
 ■ Ensure that cords for lamps and other items are not 
placed where someone can trip over them.
This list does not include all of the safety measures 
needed in your home. If young children or elderly or ill 
people live with you, you will need to take additional 
steps, depending upon the individual characteristics 
of your home.
Try crawling around your home to see it through 
the eyes of an infant or a young child. You may become 
aware of unsuspected hazards. See Focus on 
Prevention: Make Your Home Safe for Kids in this 
chapter for additional safety measures geared for 
young children.
For elderly people, you may need to install handrails 
in the bathtub or shower and beside the toilet. You 
may need a bath chair or bench. Always have a mat 
with a suction base if your tub does not have built-in 
nonslip strips. A safe temperature for bath water is 
101° F.
Safety at Work
Most people spend approximately one-third of their day 
at work. To improve safety at work, you should be aware 
of the following:
 ■ Fire evacuation procedures
 ■ How to activate your emergency response team and 
how to call 9-1-1 or the local emergency number
 ■ Location of the nearest ﬁ  re extinguisher and ﬁ rst 
aid kit
 ■ How to use recommended safety equipment and 
how to follow safety procedures if you work in an 
environment where hazards exist
 ■ Workplace safety training
Safety at Play
Make sports and other recreational activities safe by 
always following accepted guidelines for the activity. 
Before undertaking an activity that is unfamiliar to 
you, such as boating, skiing or riding a motorcycle, 
take lessons to learn how to perform the activity 
safely. Many accidents result from inexperience. 
Make sure that your equipment is in good working 
order.
Bicycle Safety
Each year, approximately 500,000 people are injured 
while riding a bicycle, and most bicycle accidents 
happen within a mile of home.
Ninety-one percent of bicyclists killed in 2008 
reportedly were not wearing helmets. The head or neck 
is the most seriously injured part of the body in most 
fatally injured cyclists. Children should wear a helmet 
even if they are still riding along the sidewalk on 
training wheels.
When cycling, always wear an approved helmet. 
Look for a helmet that has been approved by the 
Snell Memorial Foundation or the American 
National Standards Institute (ANSI), and make 
that sure the helmet is the correct size and it ﬁ ts 
comfortably and securely. Laws on wearing bicycle 
helmets, including age-speciﬁ c requirements, vary 
by state and county. For more information about 
 

--- Page 178 ---
166  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
FOCUS ON PREVENTION
General Safety Precautions 
Inside the Home
 ■ Are stairways kept clear and uncluttered?
 ■ Are stairs and hallways well lit?
 ■ Are safety gates installed at tops and bottoms 
of stairways?
 ■ Do window and balcony doors have childproof 
latches or window guards?
 ■ Do balconies have protective barriers to prevent 
children from slipping through the bars?
 ■ Are guards installed around ﬁ replaces, 
radiators, hot pipes and wood-burning stoves?
 ■ Are sharp edges of furniture cushioned with 
corner guards or other material?
 ■ Are safety covers placed on all unused 
electrical outlets?
 ■ Are matches and lighters stored out of the 
reach of children?
 ■ Are curtain cords and shade pulls wound up 
and not dangling?
 ■ Are ﬁ re extinguishers installed where they are 
most likely to be needed?
 ■ Is there at least one approved smoke alarm 
installed and operating on each level of the 
home? Are batteries changed at least every 
6 months?
 ■ Do you have an emergency plan to use in case 
of ﬁ  re? Does your family practice this plan?
 ■ Is the water set at a safe temperature? 
A setting of 120 °F or less prevents scalding 
from tap water in sinks and in tubs. Let the 
water run for 3 minutes before testing it.
 ■ If you own a ﬁ rearm, is it stored in a locked 
cabinet so that your child, and other 
unauthorized users cannot use it?
 ■ Are all purses, handbags, briefcases and 
similar items, including those belonging to 
visitors, kept out of children’s reach?
 ■ Are all poisonous plants kept out of children’s 
reach?
 ■ Is a list of emergency phone numbers posted 
near telephones?
 ■ Is a list of instructions posted near telephones 
for use by children or babysitters?
 ■ Is there a ﬁ rst aid kit properly stocked and 
stored away?
 ■ Are there working ﬂ ashlights, battery-operated 
radio and extra batteries available for use in 
case of emergency?
Storage Areas
 ■ Are pesticides, detergents and other household 
chemicals stored in locked cabinets and kept 
out of children’s reach?
 ■ Are tools stored in locked cabinets or locked 
storage areas out of children’s reach?
Bathrooms
 ■ Are the toilet seat and lid kept down when the 
toilet is not in use?
 ■ Are cabinets equipped with safety latches and 
kept closed?
 ■ Are all medicines in child-resistant 
containers and stored in a locked medicine 
cabinet?
 ■ Are shampoos and cosmetics stored out of 
children’s reach?
 ■ Are razors, razor blades and other sharp 
objects kept out of children’s reach?
 ■ Are hair dryers and other appliances stored 
away from the sink, tub or toilet?
 ■ Does the bottom of tub or shower have non-slip 
surfacing?
 ■ Are bathroom doors kept closed at all times?
 ■ Are children always watched by an adult while 
in the bathroom?
Kitchens
 ■ Do you cook on back stove burners when 
possible and turn pot handles toward the back 
of the stove?
 ■ Are hot dishes kept away from the edges of 
tables and counters?
 ■ Are hot liquids and foods kept out of children’s 
reach?
MAKE YOUR HOME SAFE FOR KIDS
(Continued )
 

--- Page 179 ---
  APPENDIX     |    Injury Prevention and Emergency Preparedness 167
FOCUS ON PREVENTION  (Continued )
 ■ Are knives and other sharp items kept out of 
children’s reach?
 ■ Is the highchair placed away from stove and 
other hot appliances?
 ■ Are matches and lighters kept out of children’s 
reach?
 ■ Are all appliance cords secured and out of 
children’s reach?
 ■ Are cabinets equipped with safety latches?
 ■ Are cleaning products stored in locked 
cabinets out of children’s reach?
 ■ Do you test the temperature of heated food 
before feeding children?
Children’s Rooms
 ■ Is the bed or crib placed away from radiators 
and other hot surfaces?
 ■ Is the bed or crib placed away from curtain and 
blind cords?
 ■ Are crib slats no more than 2 3/8 inches 
apart?
 ■ Does the mattress ﬁ t the sides of the crib 
snugly? Are toys, blankets and pillows 
removed from the crib?
 ■ Is paint or ﬁ  nish on furniture and toys nontoxic?
 ■ Is children’s clothing, especially sleepwear, 
ﬂ ame resistant?
 ■ Does the toy box have ventilation holes? If 
there is a lid, it is lightweight and removable 
and has a sliding door or panel or is a hinged 
lid with a support to hold it open?
 ■ Are electric cords secured and kept out of 
children’s reach?
 ■ Are toys in good repair?
 ■ Are toys appropriate for children’s ages?
Adult Bedrooms
 ■ Are space heaters kept away from curtains and 
ﬂ ammable materials?
 ■ Are cosmetics, perfumes and breakable items 
stored out of children’s reach?
 ■ Are small objects, such as jewelry, buttons and 
safety pins, kept out of children’s reach?
Outside the Home
 ■ Are trash and recycling materials stored in 
tightly covered containers?
 ■ Are walkways, stairs and railings in good 
repair?
 ■ Are walkways and stairs free of toys, tools and 
other objects?
 ■ Are sandboxes and wading pools emptied 
when not in use?
 ■ Are nearby swimming pools completely 
enclosed with a 4-ft-high self-locking, 
self-latching gate or fence? Does the pool 
have an alarm system?
 ■ Is the backyard pool separated from the home 
by a fence?
 ■ Is playground equipment safe? Is it 
assembled according to the manufacturer’s 
instructions?
helmet laws in your area, contact state or local 
ofﬁ cials.
Observe these rules of the road for bike safety:
 ■ Avoid roads that are busy or have no shoulder.
 ■ Wear reﬂ  ective clothing at night.
 ■ Use a headlight, taillight and high-visibility strobe 
lights on your bicycle wheels.
 ■ Keep bicycles properly maintained.
Eye Safety
Wear protective goggles while doing any activity in 
which eyes could be injured, such as racquetball, or 
using tools like electric drills or power saws. 
Foot Safety
Appropriate sport-speciﬁ c footwear also is important in 
preventing injuries. Shoes often are designed to perform 
a particular function and provide support for certain 
movements. Basketball shoes, for example, offer lateral 
(side-to-side) support, and the durable, rubber soles on 
hiking boots improve traction to help prevent slipping 
on varied terrain.
Swimming and Water Safety
If you or a family member does not know how to swim, or 
you would like to improve your swimming skills, contact 
your local chapter of the American Red Cross. You can 
sign up for a Red Cross swimming and water safety class.
 

--- Page 180 ---
168  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual
Always wear an appropriate ﬂ otation device if you are 
going to be in, on or around the water and do not know 
how to swim. Many people who drown never intended 
to be in the water. Be careful when walking beside 
rivers, lakes and other bodies of water. Dangerous 
undercurrents, even in shallow water, can overcome 
the best of swimmers.
To prevent water-related injuries, you also should:
 ■ Always closely supervise children in, on or near water. 
Stay within arm’s reach of them.
 ■ If you have a backyard pool, make sure that it is 
separated from any door in your home by a fence. 
The fence should completely enclose the pool. It 
should be designed so that children cannot easily 
climb over it. The fence should be equipped with a 
self-closing, self-latching gate that cannot be easily 
opened by a young child.
 ■ Empty and cover wading pools when not in use.
 ■ Keep toilet seat lids down when the toilet is not 
being used.
 ■ Never drink alcohol while you drive a boat and do not 
travel in a boat operated by a driver who has been 
drinking. The U.S. Coast Guard reports that alcohol is 
the most common factor in fatal boating accidents.
Safety for Runners and Walkers
If you run, jog or walk, plan your route carefully and 
exercise in well-lit, well-populated areas. Consider 
exercising with another person. Avoid roads that do 
not easily accommodate pedestrian trafﬁ c. If you must 
exercise outdoors after dark, wear reﬂ ective clothing and 
run, jog or walk facing trafﬁ c. Be alert for cars pulling 
out at intersections and driveways.
PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER
Unintentional injuries cause disability and death for 
thousands of people each year. In addition, these 
injuries cost billions of dollars in lost wages, medical 
expenses, insurance, property damage and other indirect 
costs. Do not accept that injures will just happen. Take 
safety precautions to prevent injury—while driving, in 
the home, at work or at play. Be prepared. Know what to 
do in case of an emergency. Preventing injury and being 
prepared for an emergency can save lives!
 

